**Note** - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [find the meeting time in your geographical location](http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=09&day=15&year=2010&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0).

**Note** - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.



## Regrets ##

## Previous minutes ##
Accept [previous minutes](MeetingMinutes100908.md)?

## Previous action item review ##
  * George to speak to Board re: W3C task force
  * ~~chair group to revise compatibility proposal, we'll finalize at next telecon~~
  * ~~Markus to send out logistics info for F2F~~

## Rotating scribe list ##
Volunteers for a rotating scribe list requested. Contact Markus off-list. Eligibility for free IDPF T-shirt is the reward.

## Next F2F ##
A [draft agenda](F2F201010Agenda.md) is available. Information on exact location, any evening adventures, etc, will follow asap.

## Timeline clarification ##
  * as mentioned, milestones prior to first draft have been provisional
  * deadline for submission to first draft is now end of F2F
    * editors may punt submissions if deemed immature etc
  * next deadline for submissions TBD by editor group, but note that the 3 drafts are one month apart starting end october

> [Timeline](Timeline.md)

## Backwards and forwards compatibility guidelines ##
  * A revised version, based on feedback from previous call, is available as [the first item on the DesignPrinciples](DesignPrinciples.md) page.
  * For concrete testing of forwards compatibility: proposed list of reading systems to include (for discussion):
    * ADE, Nook, Sony Reader, Apple iBooks, Ibis Reader, Bookworm, Aldiko, Stanza, Amazon (through conversion), ETI
  * ... this setup acceptable to all?

## Cross-group requirements ##
Reminder: all subgroup leads **must** make other subgroup leads aware if there are requirements whose implementations cross subgroup boundaries.

Example: TextContent's [TG.02](TextContent#TG.02_Support_inter-publication_linking_(A).md) requires a solution on identifiers from the Metadata group.

## Subgroup status report ##

### Annotations ###
Coordinator: Will Manis w help from Daniel Weck

Wiki: [Annotations](Annotations.md)

### EGLS ###
Coordinator: Murata Makoto

Wiki: [EGLS](EGLS.md)

### Metadata ###
Coordinator: Bill Kasdorf

Wiki: [Metadata](Metadata.md)

### Navigation ###
Coordinator: George Kerscher

Wiki: [Navigation](Navigation.md)

### Text Content ###
Coordinator: Markus Gylling

Wiki: [TextContent](TextContent.md)

### Styling and Layout ###
Coordinator: Brady Duga

Wiki: [StylingAndLayout](StylingAndLayout.md)

### Rich Media/Interactivity/Advertisements ###
Coordinator: Peter Sorotokin

Wiki: [RichMediaAndInteractivity](RichMediaAndInteractivity.md)

## AOB ##