<?xml version="1.0"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Flow-name property</title>
</head>
<style>
p {
	text-align: justify;
	margin: 0px;
	text-indent: 1.5em;
	line-height: 1.333;
}

@pgt
{
	h1 { 
		flow-name: T;
		font-size: 1.7em;
		font-family: sans-serif;
		text-align: center;
	}
	
	.sidebar {
		flow-name: S;
		padding: 0.5em;
		border: 1px solid black;
		margin: 1em 0px;
	}
	
	@page-master
	{
		@region sidebar
		{
			flow-name: S;
			right: 0px;
			top: 0px;
			bottom: 0px;
			width: 15em;
			margin: 0px 1em 1em 1em;
		}
		
		@region title
		{
			flow-name: T;
			margin: 1em 0.5em;
			right: 18em;
		}
					
		@region body
		{
			right: 18em;
			column-width: 20em;
			column-gap: 1.5em;
			margin: 1em;
		}
	}
}
</style>
<body>
<h1>Introducing Page Templates</h1>
<p>Three central concepts in PageTemplate layout are <em>flow</em>, <em>region</em>, and
<em>page master</em>.</p>
<div class="sidebar">
<p>Concepts of <em>flow</em>, <em>region</em>, and <em>page master</em> were
borrowed from XSL:FO.</p>
</div>
<p>A <em>flow</em> is a named sequence of elements that are displayed one after another.
Initially a document is considered to have a single flow named "body" that contains document's
root element. Elements can be placed in other flows by specifying
<code>flow-name</code> property.</p>
<div class="sidebar">
<p>By default flows are continuos. All content placed in the flow is presented in the
order it appears in the document.</p>
</div>
<p>A <em>region</em> is an area of the page where content from a particular region can be
displayed. In many cases it takes several regions on a sequence of pages (or on the same page)
to display all of the content from a particular flow: content is said to "flow" from one
region to the next. Regions can contain several columns. Regions in can either grow in
block progression direction to accomodate content (up to a certain limit) or can be of fixed size.
Regions can be of different dimensions, in particular there is <em>no</em> restriction that
all regions that accomodate a particular flow should have the same column width. Regions are
specified using <code>@region</code> rule.</p>
<div class="sidebar">
<p>In many cases it takes more than a single region to display a single flow.</p>
</div>
<p>A <em>page master</em> is a partitioning of a page into a set of regions. Regions always
exist in the context of a particular page master. Page master allows authors to create visually
rich presentation by controlling the way different regions interact with each other on the page.
A stylesheet can specify any number of page masters, a particular page master is selected for
every page algorithmically. Page masters are specified using 
<code>@page-master</code> rule.</p>
<p>This document contains three flows: one is default "body" flow. The other one represents
document title and is placed in the region at the top. The other one is a sidebar flow which
is placed in the region on the right.</p>
</body>
</html>