<?xml version="1.0"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Flow-priority property</title>
</head>
<style>
p {
	text-align: justify;
	margin: 0px;
	text-indent: 1.5em;
	line-height: 1.333;
}

@pgt
{
	h1 { 
		flow-name: T;
		font-size: 1.7em;
		font-family: sans-serif;
		text-align: center;
	}
	.pq {
		text-indent: 0px;
		font-variant: small-caps;
		font-size: 1.5em;
		flow-name: PQ;
		margin: 0px;
		text-align: center;
		flow-options: exclusive;
		flow-linger: 0;
		line-height: 1.1;
	}
	.best {
		flow-priority: 3;
	}
	.good {
		flow-priority: 2;
	}
	.lame {
		flow-priority: 1;
	}
	
	@page-master
	{
		@region title
		{
			flow-name: T;
			margin: 1em 0.5em;
		}
		
		@region pull-quote
		{
			flow-name: PQ;
			width: expr(max(20em,40%));
			left: expr(50% - pull-quote.width/2);
			top: expr(title.bottom-edge + 30%);
			margin: 1.2em 1em 0.5em 1em;
		}
			
		@region body
		{
			column-count: 2;
			column-gap: 1.5em;
			margin: 1em;
		}
	}
}
</style>
<body>
<h1>Producing pull quotes using Page Templates</h1>
<p>To create pull quotes, three Page Template properties can be
used together: <em>flow-options</em>, <em>flow-priority</em> and <em>flow-linger</em>.
<em>Flow-options</em> should be simply set to <em>exclusive</em>. This ensures
that only one pull quote is used per region. <em>Flow-priority</em> should be set
to an integer which corresponds to the quality of the pull quote, the better the
quote is, the higher the priority should be. <em>Flow-linger</em> typically should be
set to <em>0</em> or <em>1</em>, it corresponds to the relevance of the pull quote.</p>
<p class="pq lame"><em>Flow-options</em> should be simply set to <em>exclusive.</em></p>
<p>In the simplest case, we want to present only one pull quote per page. This
means that when page size is small (or the font size is large), we will need lots of
pull quotes and when the page size is large (or the font size is small), we will
need only a few. This means that we need to have a lot of possible pull quotes
in our content and allow for the selection of the pull quotes that will be used
at rendering time. Without <em>flow-priority</em> property, the layout system will simply
pick the last pull quote that it have seen. That is not desireable, as it may be
not the best one. Additional information needs to be provided that would allow
the layout system to know which pull quotes are best. <em>Flow-priority</em>
property serves that need.</p>
<p class="pq good">Without <em>flow-priority</em> property, the system will simply
pick the last pull quote that it have seen.</p>
<p>It is convenient to define a CSS class for the pull quote itself, adding all the
necessary styling information there: font properties, text alignment, perhaps color.
<em>Flow-options</em> can be set to <em>exclusive</em> there as well. In addition to that
class, several other CSS classes can be defined that would convey the <em>flow-priority</em>.
For instance, in this example, I have defined three classes: "best", "good", and "lame"
with <em>flow-priority</em> set to 3, 2, and 1, respectively.</p>
<p class="pq lame">Each pull quote is represented by a p element</p>
<p>Each pull quote is represented by a p element. While you may think that pull quote
content could be simply marked up as such and used both in the article flow and
for the pull quote, in reality it does not quite work this way. Pull quotes are
presented in sligtly different way in many cases; some words can be dropped or inserted,
styling can be somewhat changed, etc. Not all of these modifications are possible or
convenient to do using CSS alone, so it is more flexible to just accept that pull quote
content is different from the corresponding content in the article itself.</p>
<p>Getting back to the CSS classes that we defined, styling a pull quote
element always requires two classes: one to designate the element as a pull quote
and the other to assign its priority. So a pull quote in this sample looks like this:</p>
<pre>&lt;p class="pq good"&gt;
A good pull quote
&lt;p&gt;</pre>
<p>We mostly think of pull quotes as text, but any content can be presented in the
similar way: an image, a chart, some sort of decoration, etc. The rules are exactly the
same. If some content makes sense on every page, additional value should be
specified in <em>flow-options</em> property: <em>static</em>. It can be used together
with <em>exclusive</em> and it means that the content should be eligible to be presented
multiple times</p> 
<p class="pq best"><em>Flow-linger</em> property takes an integer value</p>
<p>Now, let's drill down into <em>flow-linger</em> property. That property takes an
integer value which determines how long the content can be used after it is encountered.
The number means how many times the content can be moved to the next page (by default
it is not limited).</p>
<p>Why do we need to worry about it? Remember that we'd typically have more pull quotes than the slots
for them and we'd have a bunch of unused pull quotes at the end of the page. Should
they be cleared or reused? Most pull quotes are fairly content-specific and it does
not make much sense to present them several pages after they are encountered. In
that case <em>flow-linger</em> should be set to 0. However, some pull quotes may make sense
in the context of the whole article. <em>Flow-linger</em> should not be set for
those (or it should be set to a larger number). In general, the more relevant a
piece of content is the higher its <em>flow-linger</em> should be set.</p>
<p>Finally, one more thing that we should worry about is the "last page problem". Unless
text fitting is employed, the last page would, in most cases, have a lot of blank space
on it. Pull quotes look wierd in that situation. Fortunately, they can be turned off
by this trick: specify empty highest-priority pull quote somewhere close to the
end of the document. Layout engine will pick that pull quote up as the most appropriate,
but since it is empty, it won't have any visual effect.</p>
<p class="pq best"/>
</body>
</html>