#summary The first F2F meeting of the Advanced/Hybrid Layouts WG

The Advanced/Hybrid Layouts WG will have the first F2F meeting:

  * Date:  From 2013-01-14 09:00 (PST) to 2013 -01-15 12:00
  * Meeting Location: Garden Court Hotel, 520 Cowper Street Palo Alto, CA, 94301
  * Agenda: To be announced

Note: Skype access will be available.


== Location ==

Garden Court Hotel ( Google Maps Link: http://goo.gl/maps/ggRUJ )
http://www.gardencourt.com/
520 Cowper Street Palo Alto, CA, 94301
650-322-9000 / 800-824-9028

(More details, such as the room location, to come)

== Presentation Documents ==
Barnes & Noble
http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=BN_AHL_Preso.pdf

== Transportation ==

=== Air ===
The closest two airports are San Francisco International (SFO) and Mineta San Jose International Airport (SJC).  Either is fine.

The other area airport, Oakland (OAK), is less convenient for this meeting.


=== Ground ===
For Car service, we use Deep Limo.  http://www.deeplimo.com/
Quick and reliable cab service:  Yellow Checker Cab (408) 777-7777  
Although there are plenty of taxis at either airport.

Cost of Taxi between SFO and Palo Alto should be around $60 (USD).


=== Rail ===
The closest CalTrain stop is the Palo Alto stop which is 8 blocks to the west of the meeting and a leisurely 15 minute walk
 

== Lodging ==
We have used all of these, and any of them are fine.  I would suggest the Garden Court because of proximity.

Garden Court
http://www.gardencourt.com/
520 Cowper Street Palo Alto, CA, 94301
650-322-9000 / 800-824-9028


Stanford Park Hotel
http://www.stanfordparkhotel.com/
100 El Camino Real, Menlo Park, CA 94025
Stanford Phone 866-241-2431
 

Four Seasons
http://www.fourseasons.com/siliconvalley/
2050 University Avenue, East Palo Alto, California 94303 U.S.A. 
Tel. +1 (650) 566-1200