#summary A list of concerns about fixed layout for the IDPF EPUB Workshop for Fixed Layout in Taipei on 2011-10-25

= Introduction =

In preparation to the [TaipeiFixedLayoutWorkshop IDPF EPUB Workshop for Fixed Layout in Taipei on 2011-10-25], a list of generic concerns for fixed layout is presented. It is hoped that this list allow IDPF to understand existing mechanisms or upcoming proposals for fixed layout and compare different mechanisms or proposals. 


Feedbacks to this list are very welcome.  Additions or modifications are also very welcome, but please contact the facilitator, MURATA Makoto (eb2m-mrt atmark asahi-net.or.jp), in advance.



= C1: Device-dependence? =

Do fixed layout EPUB publications for a certain device 
work well for other devices?  Or, are they deemed to work 
only for the original target?  Use of Javascript for achieving 
fixed layout (possibly together with 
adaptation and special user interactions) may further increase
device-dependence.


= C2: Overkill? =

Is EPUB3 overkill for fixed layout?  Are EPUB3 reading systems too heavy for fixed layout publications?  Adopters of CBX/CBR appear to believe so at least for manga or comic.

= C3: Fragmentation? =

There are several methods for achieving fixed layout in EPUB3.
Different methods for different genres may be fine, but more than one method for a single genre (e.g., magazines) may 
multiply implementation and authoring efforts and hamper interoperability.  Subsetting EPUB3 for 
some fixed-layout genre may also cause fragmentation, since implementations dedicated to such subsets will appear.

= C4: Accessibility? ==

Allowing accessibility is always crucial for EPUB.  There is a concern that fixed layout hampers accessibility, since one way to provide fixed layout is to represent text with images.  This concert particularly applies to M1C but also M1A1 and M1B1 in[TaxonomyOfMechanismsForFixedLayout#M1:_Mechanisms_for_specifying_fixed_layout M1: Mechanisms for specifying fixed layout].