#summary Japanese reviewers comments on Content Documents (last batch)

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

== 1.5 ==

State that other prefixes may be used.

== 2.1.3.2.1 Overview ==

This subclause should be made non-normative.

== 2.1.3.2.2 ==

Can @ssml:ph control the alt attribute of the img element?

== 2.1.3.3 The epub:trigger Element ==

The XML events spec does not define the set of permissible event types, but does mention DOM2EVENTS.

	This specification does not normatively specify how
	language designers should name events (i.e., the values
	used in the event attribute).
	...
	A number of event types are defined in DOM2 [DOM2EVENTS], to
	which you should refer for their names and semantics.

DOM2 defines some permissible event types.  We believe that the EPUB3 Content Documents spec should explcitly specify which event type is allowed.

Some event types (e.g., DOMActivate, DOMNodeRemoved) defined in DOM2 might be too much for EPUB.  We might also want to define our own event types (e.g., nextPage, previousPage, currentPage).

What does "visibility property" mean?  Reference DOM as the definition.

== 2.1.4.1.4 Reading System Conformance ==

The precedence of altimg is unclear.  When it is used?

== 2.1.4.1.3 Reading System Conformance ==

Do not make the support of MathML (even Presentational) mandatory, since
EPUB3 viewers dedicated to Manga will not support it.

 It must regard the mathml [Publications30] property of the Package 
 Document manifest item element as the authoritative definition of 
 whether an XHTML Content Document includes embedded MathML.

What happens when a package file contains an item element does not announce "MathML", but the XHTML content referenced by the item element does have it?  We propose to syntactically disallow such EPUB publications.

== 2.1.4.2 SVG ==

Remove the 2nd note since it adds nothing to the last para ("Reading Systems must ...").

Why should the @src attribute of the iframe element reference XHTML?  Any problems in referencing SVG or PNG?

== 2.2.4.1 ==

Replace "the href IRI attribute " by "the href attribute " and replace "IRI" in the bullet before last by "relative IRI reference".

We propose to use UL rather than OL.  If numbers are not usually generated, the use of OL looks strange.  Moreover, when the nav document is viewed by the browser, it will generate numbers when OL is used.

== 2.2.4.2 ==

The EPUB 3 Structural Semantics Vocabulary has many values, and most of them are probably inappropriate for the nav element.  Make clear which of the values can be used for the nav elements.

== 3.3.1 ==

Why do we need "Reading Systems that have a CSS Viewport must support the font-family property."

== 3.3.2 ==

Drop "Additional details on these list styles can be found in [CSS3Lists]." unless an updated WD is published before the publication of EPUB3.  We know  that this is suboptimcal, but we can do nothing else.

== 3.3.4 ==

There are some "characters" that can be rendered appropriately by SVG fonts but by nothing else.  For such characters, it is not possible for authors to "reference a generic font using the font-family property."

Also, "Such fallback must be a Core Media Type embedded font or generic font reference." in 5.2.3.2 CSS Style Sheets of EPUB3 Publications should be reworded as advice rather than a requirement.

== 3.3.9 ==

Replace "will become" in the last note by "may become"

== 3.3.10 ==

Duplicate oeb-page-foot and oeb-page-head, since it has not been widely implemented and nobody would like to promote them.

== 4.2 ==

"MIME string" should be "media type".

Is it OK to create a PLS document that is never associated with XHTML contents?

== 4.2 ==

What does "PLS Documents must be represented and located as defined in EPUB Publication -- Content Conformance [Publications30] ."
Declaration in the manifest?


== B.4.1.3 Features ==

In the para after the table, replace "1.0" by "3.0", since 1 is neither the verion of EPUB nor that of DOM/CSS.

We are puzzled by the current choice of required epubReadingSystem features.
We would like to suggest more features:

T2S
PLS
Media-Overlay
Mathml
vertical-lr
vertical-rl
horizontal-tb
direction-ltr
direction-rtl
page-progression-direction-rtl
page-progression-direciton-ltr
two-page-spread
video-aware
audio-aware
MPEG4
color