#summary Approach for creating best practices

= Introduction =

Although EPUB3 provides rich features for e-book authoring, authors and implementors are faced with two issues in using EPUB3.

 * Rich features described in rigid specifications make authors and even implementers feel at a loss.  Which feature should be chosen and how should they be combined?
 * EPUB3 allows good e-books as well as bad e-books.  For example, it is possible  to create completely non-accessible e-books.

IDPF can address these issues by creating best practices.

= Potential Risks =

However, best practices have risks:

 * Geographic forks: Best practices for local requirements  (e.g. an “EPUB-J”) may diverge from EPUB3 and global best practices thus preventing global use of EPUB software.
 * Transition from existing documents and software to EPUB  might not be possible without creating non-structured and non-accessible EPUB publications.  Forcing best practices might hamper such transition.


= IDPF Approach for Best Practices (Proposal) =


 * Modularized documentation: Best practices should be described by a collection of documents, each of which covers a particular area only.  Examples of such documents are accessibility best practices, metadata best practices, and East Asian typography best practices.
 * Globalization: Best practices dedicated to a particular natural language should be avoided wherever possible.  Every attempt should be made to find best practices common  to other natural languages.
 * Example-driven: Best practices should be formulated as example documents and accompanying documentation rather than compulsory rules, which may hamper transition to EPUB.