#summary Agenda, Dictionaries and Indexes Virtual Workshop 20111018

= Agenda, Dictionaries and Indexes Virtual Workshop 20111018 =

21:00 UTC on IDPF standard line (call-in and IRC info sent separately)

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

Scribe: 

Attendees: 

== Workshop Goals ==
 * Discuss and describe target functionality scope for Dictionary and Index support in EPUB 3
 * Among workshop attendees, measure interest in starting new projects for this
 * Identify additional expertise to invite to the project(s) 
 * Formation of ad-hoc group for charter proposal creation

== Introduction ==
_On: Markus_

== Dictionaries ==
_On: DanH_ 

 * Revisit the outcomes of the deferred Dictionaries effort in EPUB 3.0. Summary and discussion. 
  * [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/TextContent#Dictionaries/glossaries Top-level requirements]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/DictionariesGlossaries Subgroup page]
 * Discussion. Lessons learned. Scope and/or target functionality changes for a new IDPF project?

== Indexes ==
_On: JanW_

 * [http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/8b816668ca7e3a0d List proposal] 
  * [http://www.google.com/url?sa=D&q=http://dl.dropbox.com/u/2248375/IDPF%2520Index%2520functionality%2520in%2520ePub.docx&usg=AFQjCNGw8FNdipC9jMm_xylFX_CSmEGaqw proposal in docx]
 * Discussion. Scope and/or target functionality for a new IDPF project?

== Summary, next steps ==
 * separate proposals/activities, or merged?
 * additional experts to invite?
 * ad-hoc group for charter proposal creation *(identify: one lead + members)*
  * _note: proposal should list use cases/functional requirements up front_
 * expected timelines (membership proposal, project span)

= Minutes =
_scribe will add minutes here_