#summary Guidance for email messaging.

= Introduction =

A particular email discussion thread within the EPUB Working Group involved a quoting method based on colors instead of the usual "leading angle bracket" (or other editing practice based on plain text markers or tags). This resulted not only in lack of accessibility for persons with visual impairments (e.g. screen reader users), but also in readability breakage for sighted users, due to the Google Groups archiving system displaying only plain-text messages, and not being able to "fold" quoted text because of the absence of citation markers within the prose.

A warning flag was consequently raised (see link below), which prompted a consensus to publish and use some form of emailing guidance. It is quite clear that the quality of the public email archive is important, so that retrospective readings of discussion threads lead to a clear understanding of what member was/is in favor of what side of the argument. Furthermore, it is common practice amongst other standards organizations to back-up formal decisions made within the working group by citing / linking to specific messages in the archive.

This wiki page aims at compiling relevant information, possibly by pointing to already-established standards (or formal guidelines) published by other organizations. The expected outcome is a comprehensive but hopefully simple (and minimal) set of email authoring rules.

Link to archived email discussion raising the issue of email accessibility and readability:
  * http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/f02deaf7c16677ba

= Existing Guidance =

This is by no means an exhaustive list of existing guidelines, but it should contain enough material to start building a substantive set of emailing rules to meet the needs of the EPUB Working Group.

Note that one requirement is to keep the recommendations short (eventually it should all boil down to a simple but effective list of rules), so that they can be easily digested and realistically implemented by the mailing-list participants.

== RNIB ==

Email formats and accessible HTML emailing:

  * http://www.rnib.org.uk/professionals/accessibleinformation/electronicdocuments/email/Pages/formats.aspx
  * http://www.rnib.org.uk/professionals/webaccessibility/articles/Pages/html_emails.aspx

== BBC ==

This document is not so much relevant in terms of its contents, but more because of how it is structured and how it uses "MUST" "MAY" keywords ( http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119 ):

  * http://www.bbc.co.uk/guidelines/futuremedia/technical/email.shtml

== Text Email Newsletter (TEN) Standard ==

  * http://www.headstar.com/ten/tens-1.2.txt

== DAISY ==

_(this is a draft by George Kerscher & Gregg Vanderheiden, edited by Daniel Weck to meet wiki formating requirements)_

*Discussion List Protocols and Etiquette*

After many years of participating on discussion lists, several suggestions pop up time and time again.  We have tried to capture the most common recommendations that can be used as suggestions for discussion list guidelines.  The guidelines are listed first as a short list followed by more information on each.

  # Keep the discussions friendly. Use `(grin)` and `(smile)` in your email if tone could be mistaken. Don't use `:-)`.
    * _Rationale_: This helps clarify intentions and is an aide to communication.
    * _Tip_: Sometimes people will use colons and other punctuation to do this. Screen readers do not work with ASCII art like `:-)` so spell out `(smile)` or `(wink)` etc as words.
  # If you change topics - change the Subject Line.
    * _Rationale_: Automatic Threading software in the archive will start a new thread. It is also easier for people to follow a topic of interest by reading the subject line.
    * _Tip_: It is possible in many email packages to sort subject and by date. This allows you to read the messages about a certain subject in the order as they were posted.
  # Try to include just one thought topic per email.
    * _Rationale_: This allows the discussion on the list to focus on one idea.
    * _Tip_: Send multiple messages to facilitate response and threading.
  # Delete any unnecessary or unrelated lines from the original message. Retain information necessary to follow the thread.
    * _Rationale_: This means there will be less information to wade through. Remember some people are using screen readers and they must read each line to find the relevant information.
  # If new text is inserted within the body of the Old message, mark all new text with author's initials enclosed in angle brackets, e.g. `<GV>`  or `<GK>`. At the end put: `</gv>` or `</gk>`). BE CONSISTENT so that a person using a screen reader can use text search to find all your comments.
    * _Rationale_: In long messages, there may be only a few lines of comments.  People who use screen readers cannot glance over the message to find the comments.  Each line has to be heard to determine if a comment is present.  (Many times a person using a screen reader hears, "greater, greater.." hundreds of times.)  The angle brackets borrowed from XML are used to ensure uniqueness and to allow a user to jump from the beginning of one person's comments to the next by searching for the angle brackets with initials.              
    * _Tip_: Mention at the top of your message that you have surrounded your comments within your initial tags.  Show this at the top and suggest searching for the start tag.
  # Do not use indenting to show organization of thought or material unless you also include Outline Labels such as `1,2,3` and `a b c`, or full word labels.
    * _Rationale_: Spacial indenting is not detected by persons using screen reading packages.  This is a form of visual formatting.
    * _Tip_:  For example this memo properly uses both indents and labeling to indicate organization.
  # Put two blank lines before titles to make them easier to find both visually and via search.
    * _Rationale_: Paragraphs are normally separated by one blank line. Having two blank lines causes screen  reading packages to say "blank" twice.  Most packages new email packages also let you search for the triple carriage return.  The extra white space is also helpful for persons with low vision.
  # Send these recommendations to new list subscribers. (And repeat as necessary).
    * _Rationale_: These recommendations are not in common use and this will help the list to be a disability user friendly list.