#summary Notes & decisions from the plenaries on the first day of the Oct 2010 F2F

= Decisions =

  * DECISION: first internal draft will maximize references to building block specs (W3C etc.) even if unclear whether they will be normative in EPUB 3
  * DECISION: first public draft (EOY) will reflect a plan for each building block spec (decision or action plan)

= Afternoon Plenary =

== Rich Media ==

=== Scripting ===

Defined in ScriptingImplementationProposal. Described by Bill M.

On Scripting, the subgroup recommends ScriptingImplementationProposal, which defines two classes of OPS content resources:

  * Non-scripted OPS3 Content: Processing model is defined in OPS3 (not HTML5)
    * May reference (`iframe`, `object` references as usual, fallbacks required)
    * Probably the *majority* of EPUBs in the wild will use this type.
  * xHTML5 Content with Scripting: Processing model is defined in HTML5
    * If this xHTML5 content is reference from the `spine` it will be implementation-dependent on how this is processed
    * MAY limit OPS3 features.

Each resource `item` MUST specify (perhaps with a default) which of the two classes of OPS content resource is referenced.

Markus wonders about what exactly this implies in terms of the OPS3 Content schema. 

What about HTML5? What can we guarantee about how it is processed? We don't specify very much here, because we expect implementors to use an HTML5 rendering engine and we're deliberately not specifying very much.

George wonders whether an EPUB3 document might be made up of heterogenous classes of OPS content resources. Some fallbacks for `object` and `iframe` are as-defined, but scripted content (HTML5) may be able to be legitimately read as Non-scripted OPS3 Content.


