#summary Notes & decisions from the plenaries on the second day of the Oct 2010 F2F

= Decisions =

  * Start two new spec development tracks on the same schedule as EPUB3: Annotations and Document Linking (there is a chickening-out aspect)

= Morning Plenary =

== Metadata and OPS Role ==

Defined in ImplementationProposalsMetadata and ImplemenationProposalRoleOpsType. Described by Bill K and Markus G.

Markus G clarifies that a decision on RDFa 1.1 and microdata has been defered.

Markus G summarizes the changes outisde of OPF:

  * OPS gains an optional `ops:type` (or `role`, TBD) attribute globally for all elements
  * NCX gains an optional `ops:type` (or `role`, TBD) attribute on navMapglobally for all elements

This `ops:type` (or `role`) inherits semantics from DocBook `role` or TEI `type`. See ImplemenationProposalRoleOpsType for more detail. The values inside the attribute are CURIEs. This is what adds PRISM and book-specific semantics ([TextContent#General_book_semantics]).

Markus G suggests that we encourage authors to follow a loose association between specific `ops:type` attribute values and OPS elements.

Rough consensus reached.

== Metadata and OPF ==

Defined in ImplementationProposalsMetadata. Described by Bill K and Markus G.

Markus G summarizes the changes for OPF, which are clarified and listed here: [ImplementationProposalsMetadata#Proposals_Summary]

Keith F wonders about whether the `link` element's attributes should be harmonized with the HTML5 `link` element. 

Keith F wonders whether the additions of the `rel` and `property` attributes to `item`s are "worth it" or whether they should just be "normal" `meta` properties. Peter S strongly encourages a single solution for referencing a cover image (among other things).

Peter S is uncomfortable deprecating (Content Conformance-wise) the DC elements outside of the required 3 (title, identifier, creator).

Rough consensus reached on ImplementationProposalsMetadata. The first draft will only use `meta` and `property`. `rel` will be dropped. DC elements will not be deprecated. 

This should conclude the initial changes to OPF.

= Afternoon Plenary =

== Text Audio Syncing ==

Defined in ImplementationProposalTextAudioSync.

Marissa D adds that she may want to add a switch based on the language of the SMIL.

Markus G asks whether this is required for Reading System Conformance. It isn't.

Markus G wonders with Bill M whether this should be a separate document.

Rough consensus reached.

== Multimedia Triggers ==

Defined in ImplementationProposalTriggers. Described by Peter S.

This is not a complete replacement for HTML5 multimedia controls but does provide a usable, if incomplete, solution. Reading Systems need a declarative way to start and stop multimedia in Non-scripted OPS3 Content. This allows a set of buttons wired to start/top a unit of multimedia (potentially SMIL too?).

We're not sure if this is significantly improved from the audio/video elements' attributes defined in HTML5. 

Adobe has already developed a similar type solution based on declarative markup for magazine interaction.

Garth C and Peter S assert that content creators find the `controls` ugly.

Daniel W is concerned the the set of `actions` is too limited (it does not include a play-starting-at). 

This is *exclusively* limited to Non-scripted OPS3 Content.

There is some concern about the absence of volume up/down and some other controls. Open tickets.

Rough consensus reached.

== Embedding Rich Media ==

Defined in ImplementationProposalRichMediaEmbedding. Described by Peter S.

Peter S and Markus G believe that the HTML5 WG will work toward more accessibile multimedia (`track`, among others) in HTML5. We will need to review it when it lands.

This includes references to external content.

Rough consensus reached.

== Audio and Video Formats ==

Rough consensus reached to add a MUST support MP3 audio if you support audio.

== Annotations ==

Both Annotations and Metadata have a strong requirement for linking to another document. In addition, those links need to include some detailed location inside the document's content.

  * Start two new spec development tracks on the same schedule as EPUB3: Annotations and Document Linking (there is a chickening out aspect)


{{{
<annotations xmlns="http://idpf.org/2011/annotation">
  <annotation id="uuid1">...</annotation>
  <annotation id="uuid2">...</annotation>
</annotation>  
}}}

Not faithfully captured:

{{{
<annotations xmlns="http://idpf.org/2011/annotation">
  <annotation id="uuid1">
    <annotationAuthor>
      <name>John Doe</name>
      <identity>...</identity>
      <profile>...</profile>
    </annotationAuthor>
    <created>2010-10-17</created>
    <modified>2010-10-18</modified>
    <annotationTargets>
      <documentIndentifier>...</documentIdentifier>
      <additionalDocumentIndentifier>
        <title>Huckleberry Finn</title>
        <author>Mark Twain</author>
        <publicationDate>1885</publicationDate>
      </additionalDocumentIdentifier>
      <location>
        <xpath>...</xpath>
        <elementOffset>
          <char>432</char>
          <!-- or -->
          <time>[relative time]</time>
          <!-- or -->
          <spatial>x,y[,z]</spatial>
        </elementOffset>
        <id>#....</id>
        <uniqueString>Twas brillig, and the slithy toves...</uniqueString>
      <location>

      <renderingInfo>
        <private/>
        <public>
          <hilight>yellow</hilight>
        </public>
      </renderingInfo>
    </annotationTargets>
    <annotationContent>
      <annotationString xml:lang="en-US">My text balloon</annotationString>
      <!-- or  -->
      <range>
      </range>
    </annotationContent>
  </annotation>
  <annotation id="uuid2">...</annotation>
</annotation>  
}}}
