#summary A list of concerns about fixed layout for the IDPF EPUB Workshop for Fixed Layout in Taipei on 2011-10-25

= Introduction =

In preparation to the [TaipeiFixedLayoutWorkshop IDPF EPUB Workshop for Fixed Layout in Taipei on 2011-10-25], a list of generic requirements for fixed layout is presented. It is hoped that this list allow IDPF to understand existing mechanisms or upcoming proposals for fixed layout and compare different mechanisms or proposals. 


Feedbacks to this list are very welcome.  Additions or modifications are also very welcome, but please contact the facilitator, MURATA Makoto (eb2m-mrt atmark asahi-net.or.jp), in advance.



= C1: Device-dependence =

It should be possible to make fixed layout EPUB publications for a certain device reasonably well for other devices.

It should be possible for device manufactures to invent devices with new form-factors without too much worry about existing fixed layout EPUB publications.


Use of Javascript for achieving 
fixed layout (possibly together with 
adaptation and special user interactions) may further increase
device-dependence.

Fixed layout documents without embedded fonts are almost guaranteed to look incorrect on devices where exact same font is not available, when proportional fonts are used. 

= C2: Light-weight =

It should be easy to use EPUB3 for a certain genre of fixed layout books.  In particular, almost no knowledge about SVG, HTML,and Javascript should be required.  It should be possible to create 

Is EPUB3 overkill for fixed layout?  Are EPUB3 reading systems too heavy for fixed layout publications?  Adopters of CBX/CBR appear to believe so at least for manga or comic.

= C3: Fragmentation? =

There are several methods for achieving fixed layout in EPUB3.
Different methods for different genres may be fine, but more than one method for a single genre (e.g., magazines) may 
multiply implementation and authoring efforts and hamper interoperability.  Subsetting EPUB3 for 
some fixed-layout genre may also cause fragmentation, since implementations dedicated to such subsets might appear.

= C4: Accessibility? ==

Allowing accessibility is always crucial to EPUB.  There is a concern that fixed layout hampers accessibility, since one way to provide fixed layout is to represent text with images.  This concert particularly applies to M1C but also M1A1 and M1B1 in [TaxonomyOfMechanismsForFixedLayout#M1:_Mechanisms_for_specifying_fixed_layout M1: Mechanisms for specifying fixed layout].