#summary Metadata implementation proposals

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

== Proposals Summary ==
=== OPF summary === 
 * Introduce and _strongly encourage_ use of DCTERMS for 3.0 package metadata, with a mechanism for compatibility between 3.0 reading systems and 2.0 packages, as well as the reverse, 2.0 reading systems and 3.0 packages. State intention to migrate fully to DCTERMS and formally deprecate use of DCMES in a _future_ revision of this standard, version number not specified.
 * Currently required 2.0.1 DCMES will remain, but changed with the addition of an optional extension mechanism (opf:override)
 * non-required 2.0.1 DCMES will be deprecated. Use DCTERMS instead.
 * add a new element `meta` with a required attribute `property` and an optional attribute `about`
 * the 2.0.1 `meta` element is _invalid_ per Content Conformance and _should be recognized_ per 3.0 Reading System conformance 
 * add a new element `link` with the required attribute `rel` and the required attribute `href`
 * add the attribute `prefix` to the OPF root element
 * add the attribute `profile` to the OPF root element
 * create a "OPF metadata vocabulary" for the properties that OPF needs to define itself, as a separate profile document
 * allow the attributes `rel` and `property` on manifest `item` elements to allow expressing metadata about EPUB fileset members
 * use a vocabulary-based mechanism to provide values for the `rel` and `property` attributes (such as the DCTERMS and PRISM vocabularies)
 * ... let RDFa 1.1 provide the definition of all attributes mentioned above

=== OPS summary ===
 * Add the attribute `ops:type` as global attribute in OPS. Refer to [ImplemenationProposalRoleOpsType]

=== NCX summary ===
 * Add the attribute `ops:type` attribute on navMap navList, navPoint and navTarget elements in NCX, as optional. Refer to  [ImplemenationProposalRoleOpsType]

== Metadata expression mechanism ==

=== Property definitions ===

In the ideal case, we are able to reuse properties from existing vocabularies defined by other specifications. There are however a number of properties that we need to define ourselves because they do not exist externally (examples from above: "onix-record", "alternate-script", "cover-image").

These properties taken together constitute the "OPF metadata terms vocabulary". We can either provide this vocabulary as a separate document, normatively referenced from the OPF spec, or we can use the spec itself as the vocabulary document
(names and meanings of terms are defined inline). It does not matter from a technical standpoint which we choose, the choice is primarily one of ergonomics for the human consumer.

=== RFDFa 1.1 Profile + Prefix ===

Use the RDFa 1.1 profile mechanism to define a set of "core" vocabulary prefixes (example: opf, dcterms, prism). We normatively reserve these prefixes.

 * Add @profile to the OPF package element only
 * Add @prefix to the OPF package element only (This simplifies processing vs. XML namespaces, which does not include this simplification). 

The use of the profile mechanism to reserve prefixes simplifies processing even further, since there is now no need to resolve the most common prefixes. Plain simple XPath can be used to retrieve the `meta` element with `property="dcterms:title"` for example, since the `dcterms` prefix is fixed globally. Note that a validator such as epubcheck would be able to enforce these constraints.

In RDFa, the terms from one vocabulary can be used without a prefix. It is proposed that the OPF metadata terms vocabulary be fixed to be that prefix-less vocabulary.

== Package metadata ==

Principles: 
 * The amount of required metadata should ideally not be extended in 3.0
 * Using a content nature neutral language (such Dublin Core) as the core language items remains desirable. EPUB is not used exclusively for books.
 * The primary purpose of package metadata is to describe the package, not the abstract work. Inlining complete bibliographic records remains out of scope.
 * Fragments of abstract work metadata are included only as and if there are uses cases for simple access to these fragments by reading systems.
 * An optional method to associate external, rich, complete bibliographic records with an EPUB is however defined as well, for current and future usage contexts where this association is needed.
 * We propose to use a subset of RDFa 1.1 as the expression form for all new OPF metadata, as this creates an extension and enrichment pattern that does not require the addition of new homegrown elements and/or attributes for each case.
 * The new syntax for expressing metadata must remain simple from a processing perspective. As an example, it must remain possible to use a plain good old XPath statement to retrieve the title of the publication.

=== Content Version  ===

Proposal reflecting telcon of 2-Nov: utilize numeric content version property to express release versions of the package. Reading systems must match references based on the specificity of the version provided. In other words, if a request is made for version "1.1" and the publication that exists has a version of "1.1.4", then that publication should match the request.

Define *content-version* property.

Example 1    
{{{
  <meta property="content-version">1.1</meta>
}}}

Example 2 (via list)
{{{
  <package xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf"
           xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/"
           unique-identifier="bookid" version="3.0">
   <metadata>
    <dc:identifier id="bookid">6f24dfc73eb7</dc:identifier>
    <meta property="content-version">1.2.3</meta>
   </metadata>
  </package>
}}}

=== Metadata Authority ===

Define the following new OPF properties:

 * *meta-auth* property to denote the responsible party or authority for metadata elements.
 * *date-ref* property that will refer by id value to a dcterms:date element with opf:event value of 'meta-update'. (see dcterms:date regarding _opf:event_)
 * *signature* property, that will be optional and refer by id value to an XML Signature that must reside in the META-INF/Signatures.xml file.
 * *authority* property that will be allowed on meta elements, and will have a value of the id of a metadata authority.

Example 1: Metadata Authority Inc. injects publication with ISBN-13, preserving the package @unique-identifier, uses a (currently defined in OCF) XML Signature.
 
{{{
  <package version="3.0" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" unique-identifier="my-uuid">
  <metadata>
  <meta property="dcterms:identifier" id="my-uuid">UUID-1234-5678</meta>
  <meta property="dcterms:identifier" id="isbn-id">>9780101010101</meta>
   <meta about="#isbn-id" property="opf:scheme" content="isbn13" />
   <meta about="#isbn-id" property="opf:authority" content="meta-authority-01" />

  <meta property="dcterms:date" id="dt-01">2010-10</meta>
   <meta about="#dt-01" property="opf:event" content="meta-update" />

  <meta property="opf:meta-auth" id="meta-authority-01">>Metadata Authority Inc</meta>
   <meta about="#meta-authority-01" property="opf:signature" content="MAI-Signature" />
   <meta about="#meta-authority-01" property="opf:date-ref" content="dt-01" />
  ...
  <!-- in Signatures.xml -->
  <signatures>
   <Signature Id="MAI-Signature" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/09/xmldsig#">
  </signatures>
}}}

Example 2: ExampleEbookRetailer.com adds proprietary identifier into publication, preserving original publisher supplied UUID, but changing package @unique-identifier. Does not use signature.

{{{
  <package version="3.0" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" unique-identifier="pID">
  <metadata>
  <dc:identifier id="my-uuid">UUID-1234-5678</dc:identifier>

  <meta property="dcterms:identifier" id="pID">bk-555-555-5555</meta>
   <meta about="#pID" property="opf:scheme" content="proprietary" />
   <meta about="#pID" property="opf:authority" content="meta-authority-01" />

  <meta property="dcterms:date" id="update05">2008-07-16T12:32:27.21</meta>
   <meta about="#update05" property="opf:event" content="meta-update" />

  <meta property="opf:-auth" id="meta-authority-01">ExampleEbookRetailer.com</meta>
   <meta about="#meta-authority-01" property="opf:date-ref" content="update05" />
}}}

=== EPUB publication nature specification ===

Define *publication-type* property, enumerate values for specific types of packages that require global declaration.

The meta element that specifies that an EPUB is a dictionary:
{{{
  <meta property="publication.type">Dictionary</meta>
}}}

The meta element that specifies that an EPUB is an annotation (as per annotation proposal)
{{{
  <meta property="publication.type">Annotation</meta>
}}}

=== Required metadata ===
 * for forwards compatibility purposes, the 3 required DCMES elements of OPF 2.0.1 remain required in 3.0. 
 * the three required DCMES elements are placeholders for DCTERMS equivalents for 3.0 package conformance.
 * The content models and attribute sets of the 3 DCMES elements remain the same as in 2.0.1, with one exception: the
`override` attribute, see below.
 * On the deprecated DCMES elements in question, we provide a way to link (via IDREF) to an equivalent DCTERMS element
that, if the (3.0) reading system recognizes the link, overrides the information in the DCMES element. This override link ('opf:override`) is optional in the grammar.

{{{
 <dc:creator opf:override="idref">...</dc:creator>
}}}

This allows complete package metadata to be provided using non-deprecated elements, and allows for making use of the richer expression mechanisms available in the new expression form.

The schema will require that the destination of any given `opf:override` attribute is the 'expected' DCTERMS element, with the following mapping:
 * dc:creator ==> dcterms:creator
 * dc:title ==> dcterms:title
 * dc:identifier ==> dcterms:identifier

In a future version of this standard, the `ops:override` attribute, along with DCMES, will be formally deprecated. The override attribute is transitional.

=== The new DCTERMS elements and 'ancillary properties' ===
All new (as of 3.0) meta elements use the `meta` element with the RDFa attributes `property` (required) and `about` (optional), where the value of the property is the element content. Note that this is a subset of the full RDFa attribute set. Note also that the current (as of 2.0.1) `name` attribute is removed on the 3.0 `meta` element.

==== Creator ====
The expression form for a DCTERMS creator is:
{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:creator">Haruki Murakami</meta>
}}}

_Ancillary properties_ may be associated with any given meta element, using one or several additional `meta` elements with the `about` attribute (which in this case references the ID of the `dcterms:creator` element):
{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:creator" id="creator">Haruki Murakami</meta>
  <meta about="#creator" property="alternate-script" xml:lang="ja">村上 春樹</meta>
  <meta about="#creator" property="file-as">Murakami, Haruki</meta>
}}}

In the case of `dcterms:creator`, the following ancillary properties are defined in the spec (see further "Property definitions" below). 
 * `file-as`
 * `alternate-script`

Can these be combined so that a file-as can be provided in Japanese kana (since the Kanji is not sortable)?

May need method to include *alternative forms of name* for the same natural person (_eg_ to carry real name, if book is created under a pseudonym where the real name is well known, as for Agatha Christie / Mary Westmacott).

May need method to carry *party identifiers* (_eg_ ISNI or proprietary IDs) attached to creators and authors.

May need way to allow *professional position or affiliation* property to be attached to a creator or author. May be important in academic or corporate publishing.

The use of additional ancillary properties to `dcterms:creator` is not illegal.

Multiple `meta` elements with the property `dcterms:creator` is allowed.

_Note: when used, the `about` attribute must resolve to another element inside the package file. (Note that this means that it cannot point outside the package, the latter contrary to the new `rel` attribute on `item`, see below.)_

_Note: multiple space separated values in a property attribute is allowed. `property="foo:bar quux:qul"` is legal._

==== Title ====
The expression form for a DCTERMS title is:
{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:title">Norwegian Wood</meta>
}}}

... and, just as in the case with `dcterms:creator`, ancillary information is added using additional `meta` elements with the `about` attribute:

{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:title" id="title">Norwegian Wood</meta>
  <meta about="#title" property="alternate-script" xml:lang="ja">ノルウェイの森</meta>
}}}

In the case of `dcterms:title`, the following ancillary properties are defined in the spec (see further "Property definitions" below). 
 * `file-as`
 * `alternate-script`

===== Extended titles and sorting =====
This addresses META [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/Metadata#META_R03_Series_Titles_and_Subtitles_(A) R03] and [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/Metadata#META_R04_Sorting_information_(F) R04]

Extend dcterms:title via additional OPF properties. Define properties for *type*, *sort-order*, and *display-seq*. Allow *file-as* attribute in dc:title element. 

The _type_ attribute will have a defined list of values corresponding to commonly used forms of title nomenclature, e.g. primary, short, long, sub, series, collection, edition, slang.

The _sort-order_ attribute will be a numerical value indicating the order within a range of the same _type_ of title as the element.

The _display-seq_ attribute will be a numerical value to express how multiple _types_ of dc:title elements should be sequenced for display purposes, as this may vary widely.

The _file-as_ attribute would behave as currently described in OPF for dc:creator and dc:contributor.

The existing _xml:lang_ attribute's usage should be encouraged on dc:title elements where appropriate.

An example, for the fictional cookbook "The Great Cookbooks of the World: Mon premier guide de cuisson, un Mémoire. The New French Cuisine Masters, Volume Two. Special Anniversary  Edition"

{{{
  <dc:title opf:override="t1" id="ot1" xml:lang="fr">Mon premier guide de cuisson, un Mémoire</dc:title>
   <meta property="dcterms:title" id-"t1" xml:lang="fr">Mon premier guide de cuisson, un Mémoire</dc:title>
   <meta about="#t1" property="opf:type">primary</meta>
   <meta about="#t1" property="opf:display-seq">2</meta> 

  <dc:title opf:override="t2" id="ot2">The Great Cookbooks of the World</dc:title>
   <meta property="dcterms:title" id="t2">The Great Cookbooks of the World</dc:title>
   <meta about="#t2" property="opf:type">collection</meta>
   <meta about="#t2" property="opf:display-seq">1</meta>
   <meta about="#t2" property="opf:file-as>Great Cookbooks of the World, The</meta>

   <dc:title opf:override="t3" id="ot3">>The New French Cuisine Masters, Volume Two</dc:title>
   <meta property="dcterms:title" id="t3">The New French Cuisine Masters, Volume Two</meta>
   <meta about="#t3" property="opf:type">series</meta>
   <meta about="#t3" property="opf:file-as">New French Cuisine Masters, The</meta>
   <meta about="#t3" property="opf:sort-order">2</meta>
   <meta about="#t3" property="opf:display-seq>3</meta>

  <dc:title opf:override="t4" id="ot4">Special Anniversary  Edition </dc:title>
   <meta property="dcterms:title" id="t4">Special Anniversary  Edition</meta>
   <meta about="#t4" property="opf:type">edition</meta>
   <meta about="#t4" property="opf:display-seq">4</meta>
}}} 

The use of additional ancillary properties to `dcterms:title` is not illegal.

Multiple meta elements with the property `dcterms:title` is not allowed.

==== Identifier ====
The expression form for a DCTERMS identifier is:
{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:identifier">123456789</meta>
}}}

(The use of the unique-identifier attribute on the package element remains unchanged.)

Where it is necessary to distinguish identifier types, the existing `opf:scheme` ancillary property is used:

{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:identifier" id="issn">123456789</meta>
  <meta about="#issn" property="opf:scheme">issn</meta>
}}}

In the case of `dcterms:identifier`, the following ancillary properties are defined in the spec (see further "Property definitions" below). 
 * `opf:scheme`

The use of additional ancillary properties to `dcterms:identifier` is not illegal.

==== Other DCTERMS elements ====

Other elements from the dcterms vocabulary may occur in metadata. Like with all meta elements, ancillary properties may be used with these (so that `dcterms:subject` could be provided in multiple scripts/languages for example).

<wiki:comment>
|| Property Name || Attributes || Usage Intent || 2.0 Status ||
|| abstract || || || ||
|| accessRights  || || || ||
|| accrualMethod || || || ||
|| accrualPeriodicity || || || ||
|| accrualPolicy || || || ||
|| alternative  || || || ||
|| audience  || || || ||
|| available  || || || ||
|| bibliographicCitation  || || || ||
|| conformsTo  || || || ||
|| contributor  || || || ||
|| coverage  || || || ||
|| created  || || || ||
|| creator  || || || ||
|| date  || || || ||
|| dateAccepted  || || || ||
|| dateCopyrighted  || || || ||
|| dateSubmitted  || || || ||
|| description  || || || ||
|| educationLevel  || || || ||
|| extent  || || || ||
|| format || || || ||
|| hasFormat  || || || ||
|| hasPart  || || || ||
|| hasVersion  || || || ||
|| identifier  || || || ||
|| instructionalMethod  || || || ||
|| isFormatOf  || || || ||
|| isPartOf  || || || ||
|| isReferencedBy  || || || ||
|| isReplacedBy  || || || ||
|| isRequiredBy  || || || ||
|| issued  || || || ||
|| isVersionOf  || || || ||
|| language  || || || ||
|| license  || || || ||
|| mediator  || || || ||
|| medium  || || || ||
|| modified  || || || ||
|| provenance  || || || ||
|| publisher  || || || ||
|| references  || || || ||
|| relation  || || || ||
|| replaces  || || || ||
|| requires  || || || ||
|| rights || ||  || ||
|| rightsHolder  || || || ||
|| source  || || || ||
|| spatial  || || || ||
|| subject  || || || ||
|| tableOfContents  || || || || 
|| temporal  || || || ||
|| title  || || || ||
|| type  || || || ||
|| valid || || || ||
</wiki:comment>

The following specific recommendations regarding the use of the other dcterms elements is provided in the spec:

 * the `dcterms:subject` property has the ancillary property `subject-scheme` where values _should_ be drawn from TODO
 * the `dcterms:contributor` property has the ancillary property `contributor-role` where values _should_ be drawn from TODO

May need method to indicate intended or suitable audience (_eg_ to implement parental locks on reading devices).

(Note that the use of _should_ here, as the enumerations we are likely to identify are not guaranteed to be globally applicable (aka western-centric).)

=== PRISM metadata ===

To allow prism metadata at the package level, all that is needed is that the `prism` prefix be defined using the generic mechanism to associate prefixes with vocabularies (see "Prefix association" below). Because of this generic solution, the OPF spec does not really need to say anything specific about prism. Other "new" metadata vocabularies are hooked up the same way. 

Note: PRISM contains multiple vocabularies. If multiple vocabularies from PRISM are referenced in the same package file, they need different prefixes.

=== Series information ===

Declaring that the current EPUB is part of a collection, and which position 

{{{
  <meta property="dcterms:isPartOf" id="coll">The Collection Name</meta>
   <meta about="#coll" property="position-in">1</meta>
}}}

=== Manifest ===

 * add the RDFa `rel` attribute to the manifest `item` element as a way to express _relationship_ metadata about a manifest item
 * specify the meaning of the value `cover-image` when occurring in `item/@rel`  _(and recommend a default DPI?)_
 * the specification of the value `cover-image` includes information that multiple items can have the cover image property (multiple images with different resolutions)
 * specify that if the `cover-image` property occurs on an item which does not reference a core image type, then it is an error
 * specify that other values on `item/@rel` are not illegal.

{{{
 <item rel="cover-image" href="cover.png" ... />
}}}

 * add spec prose that require 3.0 reading systems to also recognize the non-de-jure mechanism used for this purpose in 2.0 content

 * Current non-standard mechanism of specifying cover image

{{{
 <metadata>
  <meta name="cover" content="img_cover"/>
 </metadata>
 <manifest>
  <item id="img_cover" href="Cover.jpg" media-type="image/jpeg"/>
 </manifest>
}}}


 * add the RDFa `property` attribute to the manifest `item` element as a way to express that a given manifest item possesses a particular property

{{{
 <item property="scripted" href="chap1.xhtml" ... />
}}}

 * TODO check with Scripting taskforce exactly what needs to be said re scripting in manifest or spine


=== External metadata ===
 * Add an unambiguous method to identify external bibliographic records. These records may be located in the container, but the default assumption is that they are container-external.
 * Links to external records is optional in the OPF schema
 * Support for retrieving the data in external records is optional for Reading Systems
 * The package manifest does not include these as `item`s, as they are not formally part of the EPUB publication
 * Add a new element `link` as an allowed child of metadata with the RDFa attributes `rel` and `resource` 
 * predefine values for ONIX (`onix-record`), MARC21-XML (`marc21xml-record`), MODS (`mods-record`), and XMP ('xmp-record'). The use of other values on link/@rel is not illegal.
 * There is no provision for specifying the version of the record (this assumes that version information is available inline in the referenced resources)
 * If data provided in the external record conflicts with data given inline in the OPF, then the inline data takes precedence. (correct ?)

{{{
<metadata>
  <link rel='onix-record' resource='anyURI' />  
  <link rel='mods-record' resource='anyURI' />
  <link rel='marc21xml-record' resource='anyURI' />  
  <link rel='xmp-record' resource='anyURI' />  
</metadata>
}}}

=== meta element content model ===
The meta element typically contains only plain text. Inline markup is however allowed to enrich the text where needed, in particular for i18n reasons.

TODO EGLS proposal

Note that support for inline markup is *not* added to the deprecated DC elements.

=== Full examples ===
(The examples assumes the use of @profile as opposed to exclusive use of @prefix until we have resolved how to do that.)

==== Minimal 3.0 OPF metadata ====
Identical to OPF 2.0.1. 
{{{
 <package unique-identifier="uid" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" profile="http://www.idpf.org/.../3.0/">
   <metadata xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/">
     <dc:identifier id="uid">123456789</dc:identifier>
     <dc:title>Norwegian Wood</dc:title>
     <dc:creator>Haruki Murakami</dc:creator>
   </metadata>
 </package>
}}}

==== Minimal 4.0 OPF metadata (projection) ====

Since the three required DC elements are deprecated in 3.0, in 4.0 the above would instead be

{{{
 <package unique-identifier="uid" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" profile="http://idpf.org/.../4.0/">
   <metadata>
     <meta property="dcterms:identifier" id="uid">123456789</meta>
     <meta property="dcterms:title">Norwegian Wood</meta>
     <meta property="dcterms:creator">Haruki Murakami</meta>
   </metadata>
 </package>
}}}

==== Minimal OPF metadata with a DCTERMS override and an ancillary property ====
Using the new `opf:override` attribute that allows 3.0 aware reading systems to locate richer data for the required-but-deprecated DC elements (in this case, the title), and an ancillary property added.

{{{
 <package unique-identifier="uid" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" xml:lang="en" profile="http://idpf.org/.../3.0/">
   <metadata xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/" xmlns:opf="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf">
     ...
     <dc:title opf:override="title">Norwegian Wood</dc:title>
     ...
     <meta id="title" property="dcterms:title">Norwegian Wood</meta>
     <meta about="#title" property="alternate-script" xml:lang="ja">ノルウェイの森</meta>
   </metadata>
 </package>
}}}

==== Extension metadata with an ancillary property ====
An example of how metadata not specified by the OPF spec is included. Note that all extension metadata must be prefixed, as properties without a prefix belong to the "default" vocabulary that is defined in the OPF spec. If an extension property is provided without a prefix, it will be interpreted as a non-existant item from the default vocabulary.

The prefix used must be defined in the root element `prefix` attribute.

{{{
 <package unique-identifier="uid" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" xml:lang="en"
    profile="http://idpf.org/.../3.0/" 
    prefix="happy: http://happy.info/vocab/#">
   <metadata ...>
     ...          
     <meta property="happy:foo" id="happy">...</meta>
     <meta about="#happy" property="happy:bar">...</meta>
   </metadata>
 </package>
}}}

==== Manifest metadata  ====
The first `item` shows how a cover image is identified.

The first `item` shows how a an OPS item is declared to contain scripting.

{{{
 <package unique-identifier="uid" xmlns="http://www.idpf.org/2007/opf" xml:lang="en"
    profile="http://idpf.org/.../3.0/">
   ...
   <manifest>
      <item rel="cover-image" href="cover.png" ... />
      <item property="scripted" href="chapter1.xhtml" ... />
   </manifest>
 </package>
}}}

== OPS head metadata ==

The OPS head `meta` element remains defined as the HTML5 `meta` element. EPUB/OPS specifies no particular use for this element.

== OPS inline metadata ==
(Note: what if any OPS head metadata should the OPS spec specify?)

The group first needs to ascertain to what extent the [ImplemenationProposalRoleOpsType ops:type/role attribute] covers identified use cases re semantic inflection. 
 
If ops:type/role does cover existing use cases, then we have no other explicit reason to add support for RDFa and/or microdata other than extensibility; "allow for innovation".