#summary Implementation proposal for Rich Media Format

= Introduction =

This wiki page covers an implementation proposal for the "Rich Media" part of the revision of the ePUB standard. It addressess the "Rich Media, Ads and Interactivity" requirements listed in [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/RichMediaAndInteractivity]. Specifically, it targets the requirement RM-2 which concerns about "the need for rich media and interactivity support" listed in the charter of this working group. In order for the content provider to generate ePUB v3.0 with embedded rich media and for the reader system vendor to support rich media, it is necessary to at least enumerate a list of recommended audio and video formats. Without this basic information, it is next to impossible to perform any interoperable test for any rich media enabled ePUB v3.0 compliant content on the compliant reader system.

= Contributor(s) =
  * King-Wai Chow

= Corresponding requirement =
  * RM-1
  * RM-2
  * RM-3

= Proposal =
== Audio ==
If the ePUB v3.0 reading system supports audio, it MUST support MPEG-1 Layer 3 (mp3). As such, mp3 will be one of the core media types.
  * It is up to the content provider and the reader system to decide the range of supported parameters such as bit rate, sampling frequency etc.
  * MIME media type: audio/mpeg
  * Reference: [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3003 IETF/RFC3003] and [http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_t/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=22412 ISO/IEC 11172-3:1993]
  * Description: Used for compressed audio 
  * Here is an HTML5-like fragment sample for audio

{{{
<audio id="MyAudioExample">
   <source src="idpf.mp3" type="audio/mp3" />
</audio>
}}}     

== Video ==
If the ePUB v3.0 reading system supports video, it MUST support compressed video coded in H.264/MPEG-4 AVC baseline profile format (h264). As such, h264 will be one of the core media types. 
  * The raw H.264 bitstream MUST NOT be present in the ePUB v3.0 package by itself. It MUST be embedded inside the MPEG-4 file. The file format is is defined by ISO/IEC 14496 Part 12 and Part 15 
  * If only the video stream is present in the multimedia file, the MIME media type will be: video/mp4; codecs=avc1.42E01E
  * The codecs parameter must adhere to [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4281 IETF/RFC 4281](The Codecs Parameter for "Bucket" Media Types)
  * Reference: 
     * [http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-H.264-201003-I/en ITU H.264]
  * Description: Used for compressed video

== Container ==
If the ePUB v3.0 reading system supports video, it MUST support a yet-to-be-specified multimedia container format which will be one of the core media types. This container format supports multiplexing of audio track(s), video track and/or auxiliary data track (e.g. closed caption and/or subtitle) with embedded timing information for synchronized presentation). In addition, if one or multiple audio tracks are present in the multimedia container, the audio MUST be in some compressed format. One suggestion is MPEG-4 Advanced Audio Coding - Low Complexity (AAC-LC) format. Again there was no consensus on this audio codec format in the 20101117TelCon. 
   * If the MPEG-4 system is the multimedia container format and AAC-LC is the audio compression format, the resulting MIME media type will be: type='video/mp4; codecs="avc1.42E01E, mp4a.40.2"'
     * Reference of MPEG-4 file format: 
       * [http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4337.txt IETF/RFC4337]: MIME Type Registration for MPEG-4
       * [http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_ics/catalogue_detail_ics.htm?csnumber=51533 ISO/IEC 14496-12:2008]: ISO base media file format
       * [http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=55980 ISO/IEC 14496-15:2010]: Advanced Video Coding (AVC) file format
     * Reference of MPEG-4 Audio: ISO/IEC 14496-3:2009 (http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=42739
     *  Here is an HTML5-like fragment sample for video
{{{
<video id="MyVideoExample" width="320" height="240">
   <source src="idpf.mp4" type='video/mp4; codecs="avc1.42E01E, mp4a.40.2"' />
</video>
}}}     
   * Description: Used as a container for multiplexed video and/or audio