#summary Working list of terms and definitions for Indexes specification]

[IndexesMainPage Back to Indexes Main Page]

= Indexes terminology (draft) =

This is a working list of terms/definitions.  This is not a comprehensive list of all terms related to indexes/indexing (see the [IndexesCharterProposal#Definitions Charter Proposal Definitions] for that) but rather a narrower list with more refined definitions, as they evolve in our work.

<wiki:toc depth="2"/>

== decoration ==

Separate character or string that serves as a modifier on the locator, or different formatting that serves as a modifier of the locator.  May be hard-coded into the text, or generated using CSS based on locator target type (e.g., figure, chart, statute, etc.)

== entry ==

A term and any locator list, any cross reference list, any editor's note, and/or any entries that are child entries to this parent entry. A term cannot stand alone as an entry; there must be at least one locator, cross reference, editor's note, or child entry.

== specific-term cross-reference ==

A see or see also cross-reference that refers to one or more specific entries, for example "See Smith; Jones; Jackson"

== generic-term cross-reference ==

A see or see also cross-reference that refers to a class of entries, for example "See specific ship names."  This type of cross-reference may be actionable or non-actionable.

== group navigation data ==

A string of hyperlinked letters and/or digits (e.g., A-Z, 0-9) used to easily navigate to a group of entries in the index: for example, clicking P would take the user to the section of the index beginning with P. Other alphabets and character systems would display the appropriate glyphs for any navigation data.

== group ==

A set of main entries, for example all entries beginning with "A" or that share some other common characteristic. It may include a group heading.

== index ==

Optional index head + optional group navigation data + index body

== index body ==

The portion of the index that contains all the groups.

== index head ==

The portion of the index that contains any informational front matter: title, legend, head notes, alphabetical order examples, etc. It usually precedes the index body.

== locator list ==

One or more locators associated with the term of an entry.

== locator ==

Consists of two parts: (1) actionable character string or image (2) URI.  It can also have an optional (3) target type, to indicate whether a locator points to a figure, a table, a federal statute, and so on.

== main entry ==

An entry with no parent.

== cross reference list ==

One or more cross references associated with the term of an entry.

== see also cross-reference ==

Directs the user to a different location in the index where there is additional relevant information (see also cross-references to terms in other indexes, e.g. “See also Smith, John in title index” are subsumed under this as being functionally the same)

== see cross-reference ==

Directs the user to a correct location in the index  (see cross-references to terms in other indexes, e.g. “See Smith, John in title index”, are subsumed under this as being functionally the same)

== external cross-reference ==

Directs the user to a location outside of the current EPUB.

== external locator ==

A locator whose actionable portion is URI outside the current EPUB.

== target ==

The piece of content that is pointed to by the locator. It can be either a single point or a range of text.

== term ==

Character string, representing the indexable item -- e.g., a name, place, concept, topic, or any one of an almost infinite number of things