#summary 18 January 2011 Cross-Document Linking call

= When =

Conference call from 2100-2200 UTC on 18 Jan 2011

= Who =

Present:

  * Peter Sorotokin
  * Keith Fahlgren
  * Daniel Weck
  * Markus Gylling
  * Graham Bell
  * Eric Freese
  * Bill Kasdorf

Regrets:

  * Hadrien Gardeur

= What =

== Discussion of current Proposals & whether any should be sent to the Working Group ==

  * Peter S: Implementation Proposal for Linking: links to RDFa-encoded reference data [ImplementationProposalLinkingToRDFa]
  * John R: URI Links Proposal [LinkingImplementationProposals#URI_Links_Proposal]
  * Keith F: PURL-based EPUB Identifiers [LinkingImplementationProposals#PURL-based_EPUB_Identifiers]

Markus believes that the two active proposals are Peter S's and Keith F's.

Peter S primary concern is embedding URIs (not URLs) in hrefs attributes, but he also believes that the data is structural (so best encapsulated in markup). Conversely, Keith F believes that the output should be captured as a unified URI. He believes that this is the primary concern.

Keith F doesn't fully understand how to turn this RDFa data into a URI.

Peter S proposes an 'epub:'-something scheme. While Peter S prefers a markup-based approach, he does think that a new scheme would be acceptable.

Markus notes that an RDFa-based model makes future extensibility more straightfoward.

Keith F believes that we should discuss an 'epub:' scheme at tomorrow's call to understand whether it has support from the wider Working Group.

== Persistence & changes to dc:identifiers and the Publication Identifier ==



== Recommendations for content-version values ==


