#summary Metadata sub-group page

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

----

== PARTICIPANTS ==

|| *Name* ||  *Organization* || *Role* ||
|| Bill Kasdorf ||  Apex || (coordinator) ||
|| Markus Gylling || DAISY || (chairs rep) ||
|| Andrew Gilbert || Dartmouth Journal Services (DJS) || Participant ||
|| Cristina Mussinelli || 360 Publishing || Participant ||
|| Alexis Wiles || !OverDrive Inc.|| Participant ||
|| Tracey Menzies || !HarperCollins || Participant ||
|| Michael Olenick || R.R. Bowker || Participant ||
|| George Kerscher || DAISY || Participant ||
|| Karen Broome || Sony || Participant ||
|| Chelsea Valentine || !LibreDigital || Participant ||
|| Tyler Ruse || !LibreDigital || Participant ||
|| Bob Kasher || !BookMasters || Participant ||
|| Dianne Kennedy || IDEAlliance/PRISM || Participant ||
|| Norman Walsh || !MarkLogic Corporation || Participant ||
|| Liisa !McCloy-Kelley || Random House || Participant ||
|| Helen Moore || !HarperCollins || Participant ||
|| John Rivlin || eBook Technologies || Participant ||
|| Mark Majurey || Taylor & Francis || Participant ||
|| George Walkley || Hachette UK || Participant ||
|| Peter van Gage || Harlequin || Participant ||
|| Daniel Hughes || Liguori || Participant ||
|| Dave Cramer || Hachette Book Group || Participant ||
|| Todd Carpenter || NISO || Invited Expert ||
|| Mark Bide || EDItEUR || Invited Expert ||
|| Graham Bell || EDItEUR || Invited Expert ||
|| Scott Lubeck || BISG || Invited Expert ||
|| Peter Kilborn || BIC || Invited Expert ||
|| David Seaman || Dartmouth College Library || Invited Expert ||
|| Kevin Hawkins || TEI Council and University of Michigan Library || Invited Expert ||
|| Peter Sorotokin || Adobe Systems || Participant ||
|| Takeshi Kanai || Sony Electronics || Participant ||
----

== MISSION ==
This sub-group is tasked with determining the metadata features to incorporate in ePUB 2.1 and recommending best practices for their use. This should be done in collaboration with other related industry groups, such as BISG (BISAC), BIC, Editeur (ONIX), W3C (RDFa), NISO (NLM), IDEAlliance (PRISM), TEI Consortium (TEI), OASIS (!DocBook), DAISY (DTBook/NIMAS) and others.

The subgroup is addressing problem 4 in "Current Industry Problems" in the [http://www.idpf.org/idpf_groups/IDPF-EPUB-WG-Charter-4-27-2010.html Working Group charter], *plus* three issues that were raised by the ePub Maintenance Working Group:

  * [http://www.daisy.org/epub/issues/covers-metadata Covers in metadata]
  * [http://www.daisy.org/epub/issues/adding-series-metadata Adding series metadata]
  * [http://www.daisy.org/epub/issues/opf-and-onix-xml-tags OPF and ONIX XML tags]

Relevant lightning talks from the f2f:  [F2F201006Agenda#Metadata]

----

== PROCESS ==

  * *Requirements due end of July 2010*
  * Please communicate with the subgroup using the full WG list and always begin the subject line with `[meta]`
  * Weekly call Tuesdays at 16:00 UTC / 12:00 noon EDT / 9:00 am PDT / 17:00 (5:00 pm) BST

----

== BACKGROUND / RESOURCES ==

The following resources have been provided as background for the subgroup's work:

BISG resources on metadata and best practices recommendations for senders and receivers:<br>
[http://www.bisg.org/what-we-do-cat-21-product-metadata.php]<br>

BISG product data certification program:<br>
[http://www.bisg.org/what-we-do-3-4-product-data-certification-program.php]<br>

Resources on BISAC classification schemes:<br>
[http://www.bisg.org/what-we-do-cat-20-classification-schemes.php]<br>

BIC Basic Required Information:<br>
[http://www.bic.org.uk/files/pdfs/100429%20bicbasic%20elements%20FINAL.pdf]<br>

BIC Standard Subject Categories:<br>
[http://www.bic.org.uk/7/BIC-Standard-Subject-Categories/]<br>

BIC's metadata certification scheme:<br>
[http://www.bic.org.uk/9/Product-Data-Accreditation/]<br>

EDItEUR's ONIX for Books Release 3.0 documentation:<br>
[http://www.editeur.org/93/Release-3.0-Downloads/#Documentation]<br>

NISO's "Streamlining Book Metadata Workflow" white paper:<br>
[http://www.niso.org/publications/white_papers/]<br>

TEI's "Best Practices for TEI in Libraries" (DRAFT)including a detailed mapping between MARC and TEI:<br>
[http://purl.oclc.org/NET/teiinlibraries]<br>

Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH):<br>
[http://www.openarchives.org/]<br>

Digital Library Federation / National Science Digital Library OAI PMH Best Practices for Shareable Matadata:<br>
[http://www.diglib.org/pubs/dlf108.pdf]<br>

Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard (METS):<br>
[http://www.loc.gov/standards/mets/]<br>

Metadata Encoding and Transmission Standard: Primer and Reference Model:<br>
[http://www.diglib.org/pubs/dlf107.pdf]<br>

Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS):<br>
[http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/]<br>

Library of Congress Authority Files:<br>
[http://authorities.loc.gov/]<br>

PRISM Usage Rights Guide:<br>
[http://www.prismstandard.org/specifications/2.1/PRISM_rights_guide_2.1.pdf]<br>

PRISM Usage Rights:<br>
[http://www.prismstandard.org/specifications/2.1/PRISM_usage_rights_namespace_2.1.pdf]<br>

Dublin Core fields used for serial publications:<br>
[http://www.prismstandard.org/specifications/2.1/PRISM_dublin_core_namespaces_2.1.pdf]<br>

PRISM fields for serial publications:<br>
[http://www.prismstandard.org/specifications/2.1/PRISM_prism_namespace_2.1.pdf]<br>

PRISM inline metadata fields for serial publications:<br>
[http://www.prismstandard.org/specifications/2.1/PRISM_inline_markup_namespace_2.1.pdf]<br>

DAISY metadata strategy (DRAFT of ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2011 Part A, Authoring and Interchange Framework Specification):<br>
[http://www.daisy.org/z3986/2011/Z3986-2011A.html#documentsMetadata]<br>

DAISY metadata primer (DRAFT of metadata section of ANSI/NISO Z39.86-2011A Primer):<br>
[http://www.daisy.org/z3986/2011/Z3986-2011A_Primer.html#metadataInDetail]<br>

----

== REQUIREMENTS ==
[Process Requirements Guidelines]

----

=== Properties or metadata that should be embedded in an ePub ===

----

==== META_R01 Multiple Identifiers ====
_Rationale: Various participants in the supply chain use different identifiers. An ePub must be able to contain multiple identifiers._

_Dependency: _

_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R02, Potential to incorporate metadata using a variety of metadata schemes, and META_R??, Associating Metadata at a Granular Level within an ePub._

_Use cases:_<br>
Book publishers and distributors use ISBNs.<br>
ISSNs are needed for serials.<br>
ISTCs can help associate different manifestations of the same work.<br>
DOIs can provide unique and permanent access to the current rightsholder.<br>
Publishers may use proprietary ID schemes that are needed for their internal processing.<br>
Proprietary schemes may be needed when no widely used standard is available, for example to identify a particular component such as an illustration used within an ePub.<br>

*Requirement: Accommodate multiple identifiers for a single ePub, including both standard and proprietary identifiers.*

The most fundamental requirement relating to metadata is the requirement for _identity_. Stakeholders must be able to identify ePubs precisely and unambiguously. There are many ISO standard, _de facto_ standard and proprietary identifiers in use by stakeholders in various parts of the publishing business (ISBN, ISSN...), but none is truly universal. So the standard must be able to accomodate multiple identifiers, with clarity on which scheme each identifier is drawn from, and how each identifier should be linked to further metadata resources either internally within the ePub package, or externally.

All identifiers would likely be optional, and multiple identifiers might be applied to the same ePub. Ideally the set of allowable identifiers would be easily extensible.

Note that some identifiers might apply to the _whole_ ePub, whereas others might apply to any part of the ePub (a chapter, an article...) or a resource within the ePub (a single image).

----

	
==== META_R02 Potential to incorporate metadata using a variety of metadata schemes ====

_Rationale: Stakeholders in various sectors of the publishing industry use a variety of different metadata schemes, each applicable with a sector but none common across all sectors of publishing (books, journals, magazines, newspapers, corporate publishing...). Such schemes may be highly standardised, or proprietary. No single scheme is likely to be able to meet the needs of participants in all sectors._

_Dependency: This requirement is dependent on META_R01, Multiple identifiers._

_Relationship: _

_Use cases:_<br>
Use case 1. A book publisher may wish to express metadata associated with the ePub using the ONIX metadata scheme, whereas a magazine publisher may wish to use PRISM. Each publisher is familiar with the applicable scheme, and each scheme is 'tuned' to the needs of the stakeholders within their particular sector of publishing.<br>
Use case 2. A publisher with highly specialised requirements and a specific audience may wish to incorporate metadata using a proprietary scheme, perhaps a scheme that may only be utilised by a specific proprietary UA.

*Requirement: Accomodate multiple metadata schemes for a single ePub, including both standard and proprietary schemes.*

All metadata should be structured and attributes precisely defined. As far as possible within the context of ISO standard or proprietary schemes, attributes within each scheme should be closely linked to and as granular as required by the use cases envisaged for that particular metadata scheme.

Metadata schemes should clearly distinguish between metadata that applies at *class level* (_ie_ to all copies of a particular ePub, for example a title or author name) and at *instance level* (_ie_ to _just this copy_ of a particular ePub, for example a usage limitation that might vary according to how the purchaser acquired that copy of the ePub). It should be clear what entity attributes describe (_eg_ whole ePub, or some part of the ePub such as a chapter or single image) - which implies the strong dependency on META_R01. It should also be understood which attributes are essentially fixed upon publication (_eg_ a title), and which are volatile and may apply only at one point in the supply chain or at one point in time (_eg_ a sales blurb). [Note there is no requirement that any particular scheme carry (or be able to carry) both class and instance metadata, or fixed and volatile metadata.]

Standard schemes should be well-known and globally applicable (within the relevant publishing sector), and in reasonably common use. Schemes should be stable and have strong governance. Ideally the set of allowable metadata schemes would be easily extensible.

Metadata within each scheme should be at least as 'accessible' as the content of the ePub - if the metadata is renderable within the UA, it should be suitable for rendering in Braille, synthetic audio _etc_.

_Comment from Graham Bell, EDItEUR:_<br>
It may be possible to mandate that at least some minimum class-level metadata must be supplied, in _at least one_ of a very small number of widely-implemented schemes, to ensure that UAs have access to basic information that can be presented to the reader. UAs would be required to be able to utilise metadata provided in any of these mandated schemes. Candidate schemes might include DC, ONIX, PRISM, MARC. Further metadata schemes would then be optional, and might be preferred or ignored by the UA.

Identifying a minimum set of metadata attributes, and/or mandating a small number of metadata schemes (at least one of which would be required to carry the minimum set of attributes) would be a tricky task, as it would involve a wide range of stakeholders. The perceived minimum will vary by sector, and may involve adopting different minimum subsets for different sectors or product types (which might be expressed as separate metadata 'profiles' for books, magazines, newspapers). There is an implication that all candidate schemes are able to carry the whole set of required attributes (or maybe the profiles identify a scheme _and_ a set of minimum attributes)

The aim of identifying a minimum set of metadata attributes would be to enable precise citation of content from the ePub without reference to anything external to the product itself. Any minimum set of attributes should also include a version control number to enable management of minor revisions and corrections to the ePub.

----


==== META_R03 Subtitles ====
_Rationale: Dublin Core as used in ePub does not allow for book subtitles. _

_Dependency: This requirement has no current dependencies. _

_Relationship: This requirement has no current relationships. _

_Use cases:_<br>
An ePub often has a subtitle. We are forced to append the subtitle to the title, but are getting complaints from publishers and the eBook supply chain about this. Series titles cause similar problems.

_Comment from (Your Name Goes Here):_<br>
(Type your comment here.)

*Requirement: Provide a metadata element for book subtitles.*

----

==== META_R04 Sorting information ====
_Rationale: With complicaed metadata elements, it is a bit hard to create appropriate/user frendly sorted lists. To aid confortable browsing in sorted lists, we need additional information only for the purpose of sorting._<br>



_Dependency: This requirement has no dependencies. _

_Relationship: This requirement has no relationships. _

_Use cases:_<br>
Harry Potter series<br>
With those 'accurate' title names, the sort result will be different from our expectation.
The first of the series is 'Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone' (UK) And the second is 'Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets'.
With a nomal computer algorithm, the Chamber will be located prior to the Philosopher's in a sorted list.
But our expectation is that the Philosopher's is the first.


Other use cases are available from [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Library_catalog#Sorting]

_Comment from (Your Name Goes Here):_<br>
(Type your comment here.)

*Requirement: Provide sorting information for each sortable element.*

----

=== Relationship to External Resources ===

----
	
==== META_R05 Enable identification and inclusion of external models and vocabularies ====
_Rationale: When metadata is based on an externally understood model or vocabulary, it expedites processing to unambiguously identify that model or vocabulary, including its revision or version number._

_Dependency: This requirement is required by META_R01, Multiple Identifiers._

_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R??, Associating Metadata at a Granular Level within an ePub._

_Use cases:_<br>
Subject metadata may be provided based on a variety of schemes, such as BISAC, BIC, LCSH, etc. within a single ePub.

*Requirement: Provide an unambiguous mechanism for identifying external models and vocabularies (including revision or version number) associated with a given item of metadata.*

----

==== META_R06 Enable referencing of external metadata resources ====
_Rationale: Some metadata is too large, frequently updated, or constrained to include in the EPUB itself, but should be referenced if it is available elsewhere (perhaps by URL)._


_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R??, Associating Metadata at a Granular Level within an ePub.

_Use cases:_<br>
* Subject metadata may be provided by external sources.

*Requirement: Provide an unambiguous mechanism for referencing external metadata resources (perhaps including the _expected_ vocabulary).

_Comment from (Alexis Wiles):_<br>
Should this requirement also detail that Reading Systems connected to the internet that can incorporate this data should, where needed, include this data when side-porting the EPUB to a non-connected Reading System?
----

==== META_R07 Cover Image ====
_Rationale: The lack of support for covers in metadata (defined in OPF) is problematic for reading systems and aggregators.

_

_Dependency: This requirement is (required by /dependent on) META_R??, _

_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R??, _

_Use cases: Currently, the following solutions are implemented:_<br>
Use case 1. In Digital Editions, the cover is the first page of the first flow<br>
Use case 2. Mobipocket/Amazon use a meta@name="cover" when converting from EPUB<br>
Use case 3. In the specs, aside from setting the type to cover on a guide element (works with flows, not with images), we don't have any particular way to indicate that an image is a cover.<br>

_Comment from (Your Name Goes Here):_<br>
(Type your comment here.)

*Requirement: Designate an image explicitly as a cover image.<br>

----


==== META_R08: Accommodate ONIX 3.0 Metadata in ePUB for books ====
_Rationale:_
<ol><li>Content providers wish to enhance searchablility/discoverablility of epub content, both at the consumer (reader) and distributor (retail\wholesale\library) level.</li>
<li>Content Providers seek to maximize ROI of internal metadata maintenance efforts</li>
<li>ONIX is a widely accepted form of metadata exchange, and adoption by Content Providers is increasing annually.</li>
<li>The ability for enhanced metadata to be transmitted 'hand-in-hand' with product is desirable over the loosely-coupled file+speadsheet approach that is common in the supply chain.</li></ol>

_Dependency:_ Dependent on META_R02 for canonically including ONIX terms into OPF metadata, or establishing relationship between distinct ONIX XML file and OPF.

_Relationship:_ META_R02 Subtitles. ONIX grammar supplies subtitle information.

_Use cases:_<br>
<ul><li>Content Provider includes ONIX XML Whole or Block record file to supplement metadata elements in OPF.</li>
<li>Distributor includes, supplements, updates, or corrects ONIX XML record accompanying epub file for downstream supply chain.</li></ul>

_Requirement:_ * ONIX 3.0 Whole or Partial (Block) Record inclusion as distinct asset *

_Comment from (Alexis Wiles):_<br>

There have been conversations within the working group regarding the fluctuating nature of ONIX data and it's location within the distribution and production cycle. While it would be appropriate to provide _support_ for inclusion of an ONIX record within an EPUB package the scope of the use cases detailed here, (publishers/conversion partners updating EPUB with every ONIX change, distribution systems re-processing EPUB with every ONIX change), is not, the direction in which to head.  This type of process is much better managed through *META_R03*.

----

==== META_R09: Accommodate PRISM 2.1 Metadata for Serials Publications ====
_Rationale:_
<ol><li>Content providers wish to deliver serial publications, medical, technical and scientific journals, scholarly publications, educational materials, technical documentation, illustrated books, catalogs, newspapers and other rich content to the eReader channel labeled with appropriate metadata as defined by PRISM 2.1.</li>
<li>Content Providers seek to directly leverage the PRISM metadata that they already have in place for their articles and content assets when they deliver to the eReader channel</li>
</ol>

_Dependency:_ Dependent on META_R02 for canonically including PRISM metadata terms into OPF metadata, or establishing relationship between distinct PRISM XML file and OPF.


_Use cases:_<br>
<ul><li>Content Provider includes PRISM metadata elements when delivering serial publications, medical, technical and scientific journals, scholarly publications, educational materials, technical documentation, illustrated books, catalogs, newspapers and other rich content to the eReader channel.</li>
</ul>

_Comment from (Dianne Kennedy):_<br>

_Requirement:_ * PRISM 2.1 metadata inclusion for serial publications, medical, technical and scientific journals, scholarly publications, educational materials, technical documentation, illustrated books, catalogs, newspapers and other rich content.  Fields include but are not limited to:
<p>Elements providing a Identification</p><ul>
<li>dc:identifier 
</li><li>prism:issueIdentifier
</li><li>pam:status
</li><li>prism:hasCorrection
</li><li>prism:aggregationType
</li><li>prism:originPlatform prism:platform=
</li></ul><p>Elements providing a Title:</p><ul>
<li>dc:title
</li><li>prism:alternateTitle prism:platform=
</li><li>prism:teaser prism:platform=
</li></ul><p>Elements indicating Creative Origin:</p><ul>  
<li>dc:creator prism:place= prism:role=
</li><li>dc:contributor prism:place= prism:role=
</li></ul><p>Elements providing Publication Information:</p><ul> 
<li>prism:productCode
</li><li>prism:publicationName 
</li><li>prism:isbn
</li><li>prism:issn
</li><li>prism:eIssn 
</li><li>prism:doi
</li><li>prism:productCode 
</li><li>dc:publisher
</li><li>prism:corporateEntity (of a publisher)
</li></ul><p>Publication Date Elements:</p><ul>
<li>prism:coverDate 
</li><li>prism:coverDisplayDate
</li><li>prism:publicationDate
</li></ul><p>Additional Article Identification Identifiers</p><ul>
<li>prism:volume
</li><li>prism:number
</li><li>prism:issueName
</li><li>prism:edition
</li><li>prism:versionIdentifier
</li></ul><p>Elements identifying position within in an issue or on a website:</p><ul>
<li>prism:startingPage
</li><li>prism:endingPage
</li><li>prism:pageRange
</li><li>prism:url
</li><li>prism:channel
</li><li>prism:subchannel1
</li><li>prism:subchannel2
</li><li>prism:subchannel3
</li><li>prism:subchannel4
</li><li>prism:section
</li><li>prism:subsection1
</li><li>prism:subsection2
</li><li>prism:subsection3
</li><li>prism:subsection4
</li></ul><p>Element identifying the Subject of an Article</p><ul>
<li>dc:subject
</li><li>prism:keyword
</li><li>dc:description
</li><li>prism:event
</li><li>prism:industry
</li><li>prism:location
</li><li>prism:object
</li><li>prism:organization
</li><li>prism:person
</li><li>prism:timePeriod
</li><li>prism:ticker
</li><li>prism:genre
</li></ul><p>Article Length</p><ul>
<li>prism:wordCount
</li></ul><p>Related Content</p><ul>
<li>dcterms:hasPart
</li><li>dcterms:isPartOf</li></ul>

----

==== META_R10 Allow metadata content as a separate OCF resource ====
_Rationale: some types of metadata are not naturally represented as strings_

_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R05

_Use cases:_<br>
Covers, thumbnails, etc.: some metadata items can be resources of its own<br>
XMP, ONIX, etc: some metadata initiatives have a structured format of its own and are more natural to be represented as files<br>

*Requirement: In OPF 2.0 metadata content is always a string. We should allow references to OCF resources as well*

----

====META_R11 Multiple publications for page navigation====

Rationale: Publishers may want to have their print materials be used in conjunction with their EPUB versions. They may want to reference both a hard bound version or a paperback version, which will probably have different pagination.

Dependency: This requirement is needed for navigation directly to pages.

Relationship: 
  
Use cases:

Use case 1. Publisher markets print textbooks and EPUB versions. They want the student to be able to turn to a particular page, just like the print users. The EPUB version must know what the associated print book is.

Use case 2. Publisher has both a hard copy and a paperback version that they want the EPUB to  have the page navigation coincide with. Both the hard bound and the paperback must be identified for the proper navigation to take place.

_Comment from (Your Name Goes Here):_<br>
(Type your comment here.)

_Comment from (Alexis Wiles):_<br>
Is this issue also being addressed by the Navigation sub-group? At the F2F meeting and I think on some of the calls this topic did come up and may be under their *NAV_R04_2*?
----

==== META_R12 In Line Medatata ====
_Rationale: PRISM allows for both metadata that applies at the article level but also allows for metadata to be encoded inline with content. _

_Dependency: This requirement will be dependent on a requirement filed with the Text/Content subgroup. _

_Relationship: This requirement has no current relationships. _

_Use cases:_<br>Content providers wish to deliver serial publications, medical, technical and scientific journals, scholarly publications, educational materials, technical documentation, illustrated books, catalogs, newspapers and other rich content to the eReader channel with metadata encoded in-line with text/content as defined by PRISM 2.1

_Comment from (Dianne Kennedy):_<br>

*Requirement: Provide for the encoding of metadata in-line with text/content

----
	
==== META_R13 Preserve offline reading and content side loading functionality ====
_Rationale: Reading systems may wish to function entirely in and offline mode with side loaded content. This implies that such a system would never be able to acquire access to metadata that was referenced from within an EPUB but not included therein. As a result, metadata references from an EPUB should be limited to optional elements so as not to preclude offline reading systems._

_Dependency: This requirement is only relevant if META_R05 is adopted._

_Relationship: This requirement implies restrictions on the implementation of META_R05._

_Use cases:_<br>
A user places an EPUB on a thumb drive and transfers it to a reading device. The reading device does not have network access. The EPUB must function properly.<br>

_Comment from (John Rivlin):_<br>

*Requirement: (External references should be limited to optionally required data.)*

----


=== Other ===
(Please copy and paste this template when you add Requirements, while preserving the template at the end for others to use.)

----
	
==== META_R?? (Title of Requirement) ====
_Rationale: _

_Dependency: This requirement is (required by /dependent on) META_R??, _

_Relationship: This requirement is related to META_R??, _

_Use cases:_<br>
Use case 1.<br>
Use case 2.<br>

_Comment from (Your Name Goes Here):_<br>
(Type your comment here.)

*Requirement: (Brief summary description of requirement)*

----


== Change Proposals ==
To be proposed by Metadata Subgroup and approved by entire WG