#summary Proposed changes to the Structural Semantics Vocabulary

= Overview =

This wiki page represents a consolidation of all issues opened against the Structural Semantics Vocabulary in the 3.0.1 issue tracker.

The information on this page will be used as a starting point for further discussions of changes to the document.

= Issues =

[https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/list?can=2&q=spec=StructureVocab Filtered list of open issues.]

== General Clarification ==

  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=266 Issue 266] -- That the HTML usage contexts are only recommendations needs to be made clearer, as there are (edge) cases that don't always fit, causing confusion for content creators about the validity
  
  The confusion arises from the second sentence in the About section, which indicates that reading systems may ignore semantics not used according to the html usage context. The first sentence's "is considered relevant" is not a normative requirement that the contexts must be respected.
  
  The second sentence was intended to provide guidance to authors that these semantics should not be abused (e.g., div and span documents with semantics), but a pointer to the spec prose would help clarify this point better.
  
  Propose the following new text to clarify:
  
  The HTML usage context fields indicate contexts in HTML5 documents where the given property is considered relevant. Authors may use the properties on HTML5 markup elements not specifically listed, but must ensure that the semantics they express represent a subset of the carrying elements and do not attach an existing element's meaning to a semantically neutral element, as required in [http://www.idpf.org/epub/30/spec/epub30-contentdocs.html#sec-xhtml-content-type-attribute EPUB Content Documents].
  
  When processing HTML5 documents, Reading Systems may ignore such non-compliant properties, unless their usage context is explicitly overridden or extended by the host specification.

== Property Changes ==

=== Clarifications ===

  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=197 Issue 197] -- Clarify that bodymatter term is not equivalent of XHTML body element
  The definitions for all three -matter elements need to be standardized. Propose using "main content of a publication" as noted, avoiding repeating "body" and causing confusion with the tag:
  
  frontmatter
  
  Preliminary material to the main content of a publication, such as tables of contents, dedications, etc.
  
  bodymatter
  
  The main content of a publication.
  
  backmatter
  
  Ancillary material occurring after the main content of a publication, such as indices, appendices, etc.
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=198 Issue 198] -- Is it possible to use afterword for a postscript or concluding note
  An afterword can be a postscript or concluding note from the author, so this sounds consistent. The current wording is perhaps not clear enough that it is author written. Propose the following text:
  
  afterword
  
  A closing statement from the author or a person of importance to the story, typically providing insight into how the story came to be written, its significance or related events that have transpired since its timeline.
    
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=222 Issue 222] -- Clarify relationship/use of note in relation to endnote and footnote properties (also raised in [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=266 Issue 266])
  The requirement that note be an endnote or footnote is the source of confusion, as this linkage makes it unclear why note is needed, which appears to be to move away from legacy print spatial locations. If this is the goal, perhaps the definition should be more specific about this:
  
  A note. This property does not carry spatial positioning semantics, as do the footnote and endnote properties, and can be used to identify either of those note types when such legacy naming is not desired.
  
  Footnote and endnote should also be updated to indicate that referents from the text to them are allowed.
    
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=266 Issue 266] -- Plural forms are sometimes missing, like with practice when a section may contain more than one
  Propose adding a new "practices" semantic for sections of practice questions and broadening the allowed usage context for practice to include lists, paragraphs and divs to account for block contexts within a section of practices.
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=266 Issue 266] -- Clearly define the meaning of marginalia: is it content in the margin or a type of annotation/note
  
  Propose clarifying this term as a handwritten comment in the margin, as it is traditionally defined.
  
  TBD: if this term was intended as a general semantic for content in the margin that does not fit another category, a new property should be defined.

=== Additions ===

  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=198 Issue 198] -- Add additional terms for cover elements (front/back/flaps)
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=198 Issue 198] -- Add additional term for chapter/division title pages
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=198 Issue 198] -- Add additional term for revision histories
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=223 Issue 223] -- Add semantics for individual parts of a title (number/title/subtitle)
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=229 Issue 229] -- Add list of audio and list of video properties for nav doc use
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=261 Issue 261] -- Add figure semantic for media overlays (also reqested for indexes in issue [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=297 Issue 297])
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=266 Issue 266] -- Add more properties for educational producers (learning objective/learning outcome/standard and assessment (question & answer) are specifically noted)
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=296 Issue 296] -- General request by index group to expand property list (photograph, flowchart, graph, code-example, equation, map were cited)
  * [https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=297 Issue 297] -- Add properties defined in the index/dictionary work to the structure vocab to avoid prefixing

=== Additional Requests ===

Please use the comment field below to add additional structure property names not covered above. Include a short description for each explaining the intended use.