#page for ad hoc group to work on rendition mapping (aka replica map) data structure.

= Members =

 * Jim Lester (BN) - LEAD
 * Roger Webster (BN)
 * Brady Kroupa (BN)
 * Dave Cramer (Hachette)
 * Peter Sorotokin (Adobe)
 * Markus Gylling (IDPF)
 * PLEASE ADD YOUR NAME TO END

= General Purpose =

Within an EPUB there may be multiple renditions of the same content.  For instance a pre-rendered layout of the document as one rendition, and the XHTML content as a different rendition.  For a user to navigate between those renditions it is useful to be able to creating a mapping between locations in the two renditions.

= Grammar =
See renditionMap-P-A.xml and renditionMap-P-P.xml for the old proposal.  The current updates to this are:

 # use polygon instead of polyline (more correct syntax) 
 # make the polygon syntax conform more closely to the SVG syntax for polyline
 # also update rectangle syntax to conform more closely to the SVG syntax

= Other Considerations =

A request from the Fixed Format workshop was to consider the work being done for Advanced Adaptive Layout, to see if we can leverage the work being done for specifying regions within the document. The latest versions of the AAL work is being done as CSS Regions, and the closest thing for specifying the regions is the CSS3 Exclusions and Shapes: [http://dev.w3.org/csswg/css3-exclusions/] which adopts a microformat version of SVG circle, elipse, rectangle, and polyline, and (as well as indirect inclusion in css of those SVG). 

The current proposal for rendition map is a XML based format, which makes the direct inclusion of the CSS syntax uninteresting.  However it may be useful to keep the same element set and parameters, and adopt (with a different namespace) the SVG XML representation that they came from. 

= Documents =

 * [BNFixedFormat]   
 * renditionMap-P-A.xml: [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=renditionMap-P-A.xml]
 * renditionMap-P-P.xml: [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=renditionMap-P-P.xml]