#summary Announcement of the Sapporo meeting

The EGLS(Enhanced Global Language Support) sub-group will have its first F2F meeting in August.  This meeting will be open to all members of the EPUB Revision Working Group.  More
than one attendee from a single organization is allowed.  

The coordinator intends to invite some experts in relevant standardization
organizations such as SC2, SC34, and W3C.  If you would like to 
recommend some experts, please e-mail the coordinator (eb2m-mrt atmark asahi-net.or.jp).

If you plan to attend this meeting, please contact the coordinator.  If you 
need a visa, please contact me as soon as possible.

=== Date ===
2010-08-03/04 (two days)
The meeting will start at 09:30(JST).

=== Meeting Location as well as access from the airport ===

Sapporo Convention Center, Sapporo, Japan
 * (English) http://www.sora-scc.jp/eng/index.html
 * (Chinese) http://www.sora-scc.jp/cn/index.html
 * (Japanese) http://www.sora-scc.jp/

=== Skype access ===

The coordinator will try to provide good Skype access.

=== Accommodations ===

The closest hotel is Acsent Inn Sapporo.  It 
takes from this hotel to the meeting location
less than 10 minutes by foot.  No other hotels
are in walking distance.

 * (English) http://web.travel.rakuten.co.jp/portal/my/info_page_e.Eng?f_no=18487
 * (Chinese) http://www.tabimado.net.cn/hotelinfo/18487

The number of rooms available in this hotel is less than
20, since it is a small hotel.  If you do need a room
in this hotel, make a reservation as soon as possible.

Information about other hotels are available at many
web sites including the two sites shown above.

This hotel is fully booked as of July 12.  You might want to 
try [http://www.arccityhotel.com/english.html Shin-Sapporo ARC City Hotel], which is close to New Sapporo station.  It takes 14 min from this station to Higashi 
Sapporo, and then 8 min from Higashi Sapporo station to Sapporo 
Convention Center.


You might want to try hotels close to Odori station.  
They are much more convenient for sightseeing and 
are even closer to the meeting location.  However, 
three subway lines are available in this station (I'm sure 
you can find information in English).  If you are not like 
me (i.e., you are not lost always), you might want to try hotels around  
Odori station such as 

 * [http://web.travel.rakuten.co.jp/portal/my/info_page_e.Eng?f_no=50125 RICHMOND HOTEL SAPPORO EKIMAE]
 * [http://web.travel.rakuten.co.jp/portal/my/info_page_e.Eng?f_no=79255 Mercure Hotel Sapporo]
 * [http://web.travel.rakuten.co.jp/portal/my/info_page_e.Eng?f_no=70234 Hotel Resol Trinity Sapporo]


[http://www.city.sapporo.jp/st/routemap-timetable/rosenzu.html　Sappro subway map]


[http://www.sora-scc.jp/pdf/access/access_e.pdf A map around Sapporo Convention Center]


=== Agenda ===


8/3
    * Roll call of experts
    * Adoption of the agenda
    * EPUB 2.1 process overview
    * Review of EGLS requirement list
      * Page progression direction
         * Manga in German (Kanai)
      * Writing mode
      * Mixed Text
      * Line breaking
      * Ruby 
    * Review of CSS3 for CJK text layout (Murakami)

8/4

    * Solution options for establishing a relation between EPUB/OPS and CSS3
    * Review of future consideration issues from EPUB Maintenance WG
    * Review of EGLS requirement list
       * User-defined characters or glyphs
         * Display of End User Defined Characters in the Web -- real world experience (Phobos Chang)
         * User-defined characters or glyphs by SVG (Fujisawa)
       * Misc.



If you propose some other topics , please e-mail the entire EPUB Revision
WG.  But remember that this meeting will be devoted to reviewing 
requirement lists and studying possible solutions. 

=== Slides ===

 * [http://www.slideshare.net/MURATAMakoto/egls-sapporo-meeting-4921946 Sapporo meeting self introduction by the coordinator, use of English, agenda, and acclamation]
 * [http://www.slideshare.net/MURATAMakoto/overview-of-egls-requirement-list-4921951 Overview of EGLS requirements] Murata
 * [http://nadita.com/murakami/epub-css/ CSS: current status and future directions for global languages] Murakami
 * [http://www.slideshare.net/fujisawa/user-defined-characters-and-svg-fonts-4898651 User Defined Characters and SVG Fonts] Fujisawa
 * [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/files/EUDC.ppt Requirements of End User Defined Characters & Some Frequently Used Solutions] Phobos Chang
=== Minutes ===

To be supplied.

=== Togetter in Japanese ===

[http://togetter.com/li/39592 First day]
[http://togetter.com/li/39776 Second day, morning session]
[http://togetter.com/li/39841 Second day, afternoon session]

=== General information about Sapporo ===
	
	Here are some web sites in English.  I am sure that 
	a lot of information in Chinese and Korean can be easily
	found.

	* http://wikitravel.org/en/Sapporo
	* http://www.japan-guide.com/e/e2163.html
	* http://www.welcome.city.sapporo.jp/english/