#summary Potential solutions to SNL_R3.11 (Expando Image Support)

This page has potential solutions for [StylingAndLayout#SNL_R3.11_Expando_Image_Support SNL_R13.11 "Expando Image Support",] from the [StylingAndLayout Styling and Layout Sub-group Page].

NOTE: based on subgroup discussion this proposal can be considered retitled as "Add 'zoomable' to list of OPS 3.0 values defined for 'role' attribute". Ignore CSS class name alternative.

= attribute-axis metadata =

A general way to add metadata at the HTML element level is posited to be part of EPUB3. This could be used to add a named attribute such as "zoomable" to images, IFRAMES, and perhaps other elements that indicates that these elements may (at Reading System option) be separated from the normal page layout and more prominently displayed, mostly likely based on a user action.

This solution can address all the use cases for expando images support.

Pros:
 # Uses a mechanism we need for other purposes
 # No possibility to conflict with document-specific content/style information 
 # Should not impede 2.0 Reading Systems

Cons:
 # Unclear how easily a document-based fallback implementation could be provided via JavaScript

= CSS class name =

The spec could define that the presence of the style class "idpf-zoomable" on an image, IFRAME, and perhaps other elements indicates that these elements may (at Reading System option) be separated from the normal page layout and more prominently displayed, mostly likely based on a user action.

This solution can address all the use cases for expando images support.

Pros:
 # Uses an existing mechanism
 # A fallback implementation could conveniently provided in document JavaScript for documents where this was particularly appropriate (it being rather trivial to provide a "hover" and/or "click" event handler for all elements of a particular class)
 # Should not impede 2.0 Reading Systems

Cons:
 # gauche to layer on semantics to a CSS class name in this manner
 # Could theoretically conflict with document-specific class definition (although this risk would be miniscule and could be further reduced by further naming trickery) 

= Default to true - allow disabling =

The spec could define that for certain elements like image and IFRAME, Reading Systems are free to ignore the normal CSS Box Model and provide a more prominent display, most likely based on a user action, unless some indication is present that for a given image or IFRAME this behavior should be disabled. For images that are things like icons, backgrounds or borders for text, i.e. that are designed to be displayed only as part of the formatted page, that indication would need to be provided.

This could be done in conjunction with either the attribute-axis or CSS-class approaches.

This solution can address all the use cases for expando images support.

Pros:
 # May enable an enhanced user experience in more situations than if an explicit "OK" is needed
 # Should not impede 2.0 Reading Systems

Cons:
 # User experience may be degraded if authoring tool support lags and users end up accidentally getting "zoomed in" views of borders, background images, icons, etc.