#summary Potential solutions to SNL_R4.1

This page has potential solutions for [StylingAndLayout##SNL_R4.1_Specific_sized_renditions "Specific Size Renditions"] from the [StylingAndLayout Styling and Layout Sub-group Page].

= SNL_R4.1_PS1 Specific sized renditions =

This potential solution is to slightly generalize the existing ability of EPUB to specify multiple renditions (multiple rootfiles in OCF container.xml), adding a metadata attribute that Reading Systems can optionally use to help determine the optimum version of the content to display.

This solution would, specifically:

1. change OCF 3.0 spec to include an optional "rendition attribute" or element on rootfile elements to facilitate choosing between them. Specific representation of such "rendition attribute" TBD depending on overall metadata approach in EPUB 3.0, but this would at a minimum enable specifying that a rendition is pre-paginated and, if so, include "width" and "height". Additional metadata could include capabilities like interactive, online, even the capability to arbitrarily tag or name renditions. 

2. change sec 3.5.1 of OCF 3.0 to read: 'One and only one <rootfile> element with a media-type of “application/oebps-package+xml” that does not include a rendition attribute SHOULD be included (the "default rendition", and for compatibility with EPUB 2.x Reading Systems this element SHOULD be the first <rootfile> element that has a media-type of “application/oebps-package+xml”'

3. relax the restriction that content referenced by OPF spine has to be XHTML, so SVG can be referenced directly, i.e. without a wrapper XHTML. This is not an absolute requirement of this proposal but would simplify the format and make it easier to dynamically distinguish paginated content (vs. SVG images in XHTML "sheep's clothing"). For compatibility with EPUB 2.x Reading Systems such usage of SVG SHOULD NOT appear in the default rendition.

Pros:
 # Simple generalization of existing mechanism in EPUB
 # Enables all requirements to be met
 # Conforming 2.0 Reading Systems should ignore the new attribute (if appropriately namespaced) as well as the existence of multiple rootfiles in container.xml and directly-OPF-referenced SVG images in paginated rootfiles (since they will not appear first).
 # Reading Systems will not have to probe for characteristics of different renditions
 # Promotes  accessibility by requiring a non-paginated default rendition.
 # Metadata on renditions would be a powerful general mechanism that might help address other requirements (e.g. interactivity)

Cons:
 # ???