#summary This page provides information for the Taipei workshop for fixed layout

= Introduction =

This page provides information about the technical content of the 
IDPF EPUB workshop for fixed layout in Taipei on 2011-10-25 from 09:00 CST (01:00:00 UTC) to 16:00 CST (08:00 UTC).

The goals for this workshop is to develop shared understanding of current situation
and start to brainstorm & discuss potential mechanisms for addressing gaps.  As a result of this workshop, IDPF could create proposed working group charter(s) to address priority gaps
  
Logistical information for phone/Web conference (no RSVP necessary) and physical attendance: TaipeiFixedLayoutWorkshopLogistics.

A [http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/d9f87c1cf4d4b58b/9abbdc8ce7ebf841?lnk=gst&q=taipei+pre+mccoy+TDPF+#9abbdc8ce7ebf841 pre announcement] of this workshop is available.


= Draft Agenda =

 # Opening (2011-10-25 09:00 CST - 2011-10-25 01:00:00 UTC - 2011-10-24 18:00 Pacific Daylight TIme)
 # Workshop overview (Bill McCoy, IDPF)
 # [MotivationsForFixedFormat Motivations for fixed layout] (Bill McCoy, IDPF)
 # [TaxonomyOfMechanismsForFixedLayout Taxonomy of mechanisms for fixed layout] (MURATA, JEPA)
 # Metadata for Fixed Laout (Kanai, Sony)
 # The Barnes & Noble Fixed-layout Format (Roger Webster,B&N)
 # ???? (?, Fuji Film)
 # How to go foward?
 # Closing (16:00 CST - 08:00 UTC - 2011-10-25 01:00 PDT)


= Existing formats for traditional fixed-layout =

This group of formats provide traditional fixed-layout.  Text reflow 
is not typically allowed.

== EPUB extensions or conventions ==

To be supplied. 

(Feel free to fill out this subsection.  The facilitator might change  
your text or move it to different wiki pages, though.)

 * [http://no722.cocolog-nifty.com/ ChainLP (free software, in Japanese)]
  # ChainLP  creates EPUB (Examples [http://webcomic.bake-neko.net/Comics/shima001/shima001_epub.epub 1] and  [http://webcomic.bake-neko.net/Comics/shima002/shima002_epub.epub 2])  from a sequence of image files.

 * [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/files/harukoJPEG.epub JEPG-in-spine example]
 * [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/files/harukoHTML.epub JPEG-in-HTML-in-spine example]
 * [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/files/harukoSVG.epub JPEG-in-SVG example]
 * [BNFixedFormat] ([http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/files/COSMO-20101001_drp.epub Example])
 * [iBooksFixedLayout]
 * [SonyFixedLayoutFormat]

== Non-EPUB formats ==

To be supplied. 

(Feel free to fill out this subsection.  The facilitator might change  
your text or move it to different wiki pages, though.)


= On-going attempts for making fixed-layout adaptive and interactive =

There are some attempts for making fixed-layout adaptive  and interactive.  One 
motivation is to make the content more attractive and another is to overcome the small screen size.

(Feel free to fill out this subsection.  The facilitator might change  
your text or move it to different wiki pages, though.)