#summary Telcon Agenda, 6th of April 2011

*Note* - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=04&day=6&year=2011&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0 find the meeting time in your geographical location].

*Note* - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

== Scribe ==
First available in order: _Bill, Marisa, Garth, Dan  _ 

== Regrets ==
Eric Freese

== Previous minutes ==
[Telcon033011Minutes]

== Previous Action Items ==
 * Markus and Matt to start integrating API into specs with help from Kevin@apple
 * Markus ping Peter about script security warning prose
 * group to settle quickly on navhide, else this issue will be deferred to a later revision
 * Apple, Sony and RS vendors provide answer to whether 4b would work for them

== Timeline and Issue resolution status ==
 * Wednesday 4th of May: WG internal "candidate"
 * 4th - 16th May: proofreading/polishing
 * 16 or 17th May: submission

 * remaning _major_ issues dealt with on calls and list
 * _minor_ issues that still need discussion: chairs will post 1 proposed solution; 72 hour window for objections/modification suggestions.


== Scripting Issues ==
_ Status update - API spec integration _ 

== Linking Scheme Registry ==
 * BillM/Markus: proposal for registry setup
  * a linking scheme is a standalone IDPF spec; 
   * it goes through the standard IDPF approval process, 
   * it is subject to IP review
   * it uses the same versioning approach/guidelines as the other specs
   * and so on.
   * thus, EPUB3 (and future) specs can normatively reference entries in the registry
  * the registry is broad enough in scope to eventually contain at least one scheme for the "left-hand-side" (ie Publication identifier as opposed to fragment identifier)
  * IDPF may define an incubation process for new schemes (will work on this after 3.0 is out)
  * the registry will live outside the /30/ branch at idpf.org (e.g. http://www.idpf.org/epub/linking/)
  * this registry is just an index, so the actual CFI spec would live at something like http://www.idpf.org/epub/linking/cfi/


 * CFI: status, further edits? / reviews
 * CFI: are we clear on usage contexts?

_The intent is to submit CFI to the board along with the EPUB3 spec in May. Note that there is one [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/source/browse/#svn%2Ftrunk%2Fsrc%2Fsamples%2Fcfi  implementation]_

== navhide ==
_Last remaining nav issue (Issue 84). If not settled on this call, deferred._
 * as suggested on prev call: can we use @hidden after all?
  * would we or would we not be skewing semantics / trigger undesired UA behaviors? [http://dev.w3.org/html5/spec/Overview.html#the-hidden-attribute the hidden attribute definition]
  * since not tristate, does not allow expression of rendering intent in non-browser UI widgets, but we can probably live with that

== Video Codecs ==
_ Progress on reports from Sony, Apple (and other RS vendors who have not expressed position yet) re support for [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/CodecsRevisited#Option_#5:_"Ride_two_horses_for_real,"_require_Reading 4B] as a solution? _

== AOB ==

=== Next call ===
13th of April.