#summary Telcon Agenda, 15th of September 2010

*Note* - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=09&day=15&year=2010&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0 find the meeting time in your geographical location].

*Note* - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

== Regrets ==

== Previous minutes ==
Accept [MeetingMinutes100908 previous minutes]?

== Previous action item review ==
 * George to speak to Board re: W3C task force
 * ~~chair group to revise compatibility proposal, we'll finalize at next telecon~~
 * ~~Markus to send out logistics info for F2F~~

== Rotating scribe list ==
Volunteers for a rotating scribe list requested. Contact Markus off-list. Eligibility for free IDPF T-shirt is the reward.

== Next F2F ==
A [F2F201010Agenda draft agenda] is available. Information on exact location, any evening adventures, etc, will follow asap.

== Backwards and forwards compatibility guidelines ==
 * A revised version, based on feedback from previous call, is available as [DesignPrinciples the first item on the DesignPrinciples] page.
 * For concrete testing of forwards compatibility: proposed list of reading systems to include (for discussion):
  * ADE, Nook, Sony Reader, Apple iBooks, Ibis, Stanza, Amazon (through conversion), Google, ETI
 * ... this setup acceptable to all?

== Cross-group requirements ==
Reminder: all subgroup leads *must* make other subgroup leads aware if there are requirements whose implementations cross subgroup boundaries.

Example: TextContent's [TextContent#TG.02_Support_inter-publication_linking_(A) TG.02] requires a solution on identifiers from the Metadata group.

== Subgroup status report ==

=== Annotations  ===
Coordinator: Will Manis w help from Daniel Weck

Wiki: [Annotations]

=== EGLS  ===
Coordinator: Murata Makoto

Wiki: [EGLS]

=== Metadata ===
Coordinator: Bill Kasdorf

Wiki: [Metadata]

=== Navigation  ===
Coordinator: George Kerscher

Wiki: [Navigation]

=== Text Content  ===
Coordinator: Markus Gylling

Wiki: [TextContent]

=== Styling and Layout ===
Coordinator: Brady Duga

Wiki: [StylingAndLayout]

=== Rich Media/Interactivity/Advertisements ===
Coordinator: Peter Sorotokin

Wiki: [RichMediaAndInteractivity]

== AOB ==