#summary Telcon Agenda, 2nd of February 2011

*Note* - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=02&day=02&year=2011&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0 find the meeting time in your geographical location].

*Note* - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

== Scribe ==
First available in order: _Garth, Dan, Bill, Marisa,   _ 

== Regrets ==

== Previous minutes ==
[Telcon20110126Minutes]

== Previous action item review ==
 * ACTION: Markus to add placeholder in spec with 'at-risk' warning for linking section

== Spec draft status update ==

=== Notes from editors ===
 * remaining overarching work
 * handling of responses to trail threads
 * other methods for helping out

=== Outstanding atomic issues (a selection of our finest) ===

==== Issue 72 (scripting languages) ===

==== Issue 70 (SVG) ====
 * intrinsic fallbacks for SVG? [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#sec-fallback-processing-flow-intrinsic Current spec section] is empty.
 * restrictions on usage of non-SVG namespace elements inside SVG? [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-contentdocs.html#sec-svg-restrictions Current spec section] contains stubs talking about _svg:foreignObject_ and _svg:title_

==== SVG scripting ====
Clarification needed:  [http://www.w3.org/TR/SVG/script.html#ScriptElement SVG scripting] is included in our SVG subset, yes? 
  * _Repercussions? (event bubbling etc)_

==== SVG and CSS ====
Spec says that [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-contentdocs.html#sec-css-content-conf the EPUB CSS Profile only applies to XHTML Content Documents]. 

 * What if anything do we say about CSS applied to SVG?

==== Metadata Issues ===
49, 67, 68, 71

 * @BillK; plan for subgroup meeting to settle these

== Fragment Identifiers ==

 * [ImplementationProposalFragmentIdentifier]
 * [http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/f4aafc277eced537 List thread]
 * [http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/e03520104dde278 October timeframe response from DanW]
== Any other business ==