#summary Telcon Agenda, 8th of September 2010

*Note* - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=09&day=08&year=2010&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0 find the meeting time in your geographical location].

*Note* - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />

== Regrets ==

== Previous minutes ==
Accept [MeetingMinutes100901 previous minutes]?

== Previous action item review ==
 * KeithF to draft more detailed guidelines on forward/backwards compatibility
 * Makoto, Brady, BillM to propose draft of such a CSS WG liaison letter

== Next F2F ==
Finalize San Francisco 18-20 October?

== epub-conform ==
Quick discussion.  Visit the [http://code.google.com/p/epub-conform/ epub-conform Google code site].

== Implementation proposals - process ==
 * Depending on extent of proposal, either link from requirement to external wiki doc, or put proposal in subheading below req
 * Initial briefness is generally OK, subsequent requests for expansion to be expected
  * to clarify all details of the proposal
  * to ultimately serve as fodder for spec prose
 * recurring fields: 
  * optional or required (with regards to content conformance and reading system conformance)

== Subgroup status report ==

=== Annotations  ===
Coordinator: Will Manis w help from Daniel Weck

Wiki: [Annotations]

=== EGLS  ===
Coordinator: Murata Makoto

Wiki: [EGLS]

=== Metadata ===
Coordinator: Bill Kasdorf

Wiki: [Metadata]

=== Navigation  ===
Coordinator: George Kerscher

Wiki: [Navigation]

=== Text Content  ===
Coordinator: Markus Gylling

Wiki: [TextContent]

=== Styling and Layout ===
Coordinator: Brady Duga

Wiki: [StylingAndLayout]

=== Rich Media/Interactivity/Advertisements ===
Coordinator: Peter Sorotokin

Wiki: [RichMediaAndInteractivity]

== Backwards and forwards compatibility guidelines ==

=== Background reading ===

Orientation paper (Keith): CompatibilityOverview

=== Proposal ===

_EPUB 3.0 distinguishes between content conformance and reading system conformance._

For modified 2.0 features in 3.0:
 * 3.0 content conformance allows only the new construct/syntax/feature.
 * 3.0 reading system conformance requires recognizing and processing the old construct/syntax/feature.
 * Modifications of 2.0 constructs/syntax/features is limited to those that do not break upwards compatibility (i.e. retain, as much as possible, the ability of a 2.0 reading system to read a 3.0 EPUB) {1}.  For example, this goal would likely obviate the "simple EPUB with no OPF and no NCX" direction, as a 2.0 Reading System couldn't find the first page, without a "spine" in the OPF.  Whereas, relaxing the "no padding at the end of mimetype" rule, might be fine, as known 2.0 reading systems are more lenient here.

For entirely new features in 3.0:
 * New features added to EPUB 3.0 should be designed with upwards compatibility in mind {1}; which we could qualify with for example
  * should be able to fall back from using the XHTML 1.1 rule of "ignoring unrecognized content, and continue processing its children"
  * must never shadow or interfere with 2.0 logic
  * where applicable, require a bundled CSS definition for its rendering (aka content conformance requirement not to omit style info for new elements in OPS)

_Note that these are guidelines that we *may* sacrifice on a case-by-case basis._

{1} We acknowledge the fact that we will not be able to qualify this fully empirically. Whether a certain construct/syntax/feature breaks upwards compatibility will sometimes be a matter of common-sense judgement, and sometimes a matter of reports based on testing a subset of existing Reading Systems, but it will never be a fact determined with 100% accuracy. We also need to define "break". 

Notes, comments:

This would mean that a 2.01 EPUB will not necessarily be valid to 3.0 (as content conformance definitions would vary between these two specs). But, through reading system conformance statements in the 3.0 spec, 3.0 reading systems would be required to support 2.0 content. (Example: an EPUB with DTBook or XML islands is not valid according to 3.0 content conformance, but a 3.0 reading system must still recognize and process these).


== AOB ==