#summary Telcon Agenda, 9th of February 2011

*Note* - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=02&day=09&year=2011&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0 find the meeting time in your geographical location].

*Note* - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

== Scribe ==
First available in order: _Garth, Dan, Bill, Marisa,   _ 

== Regrets ==

== Previous minutes ==
[Telcon20110202Minutes]

== Previous action item review ==
 * markus to remove remark from CD about javascript version
 * BillK set up call with metadata group to discuss outstanding meta issues
 * x to inform W3C about the epubcfg draft (x = Hadrien?)
 * PeterS to include epubcfi section into Publications, Markus+Matt integration edit pass
 * Murata-san to start work on IETF registration of epub media type

== Issues ==

=== IRI vs URI ===
[http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/3e2a819ea2216e8b List thread]

 * XHTML: inherits html5 definition of valid URL
 * SVG 1.1: uses IRI (although currently references XLink 1.0, sb 1.1?)
 * MO: uses IRI (via SMIL3)
 * _Package Document ?_

=== Version of SVG to reference ===

_SVG 1.1 SE (ED/CR/PR) or SVG 1.1 (REC)?_

 * [http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/b004236b943caf79 Thread]
 * Issue 63 

=== CSS ===

==== Nature of CSS Profile ====
 * list of css rules that Reading Systems should/must support (as in EPUB 2)
 * also affect content conformance? 

==== position:fixed ====
Do we have a solution close at hand, or wait til post-public draft period to settle it?

[http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/9c555c686c0757d2 Thread]

==== CSS encoding ====
[http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/65ef9f20a84f3b4b Thread]

Note: use of utf-8 or utf-16 is already required by EPUB2, this is carried forward to EPUB3. Do we need to add anything about use of @charset?

=== Metadata ===
==== DCMES and DCTERMS language ====
[http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/52f7b5c063ffabbb Thread]

[http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#elemdef-opf-dclanguage Current spec wording (on DCMES and DCTERMS)]

==== References to external code lists ====
Issue applies to [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#propdef-role role] and [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#propdef-title-type title-type].

== WG consensus to submit to board ==
_ Call for consensus to recommend to the Board to publish the latest Editors Draft as a proposed Public Draft specification_ (with resolutions above included)

=== Mechanisms to collect public input ===
We want one single mechanism to reduce work load and confusion.

 * Suggestion 1: use issue tracker with dedicated tag 
 * Suggestion 2: _dedicated mailing list???_

== AOB ==
=== Next call ===
Suggestion: biweekly calls henceforth unless notification on extra call. Next call: Feb 23.