#summary Root page for the IDPF workshop on Advanced/Hybrid Fixed Layouts in EPUB (July 6 2012, Tokyo & via web conference)

=IDPF Workshop: Advanced/Hybrid Fixed Layouts in EPUB=

*Date*: 6 July Friday, 2012

*Time*: 10:00am - 5:00pm

*Venue*: FUJIFILM Tokyo Head Office meeting room #201 at Midtown West, Roppongi(The capacity of the meeting room is limited to 40 persons.)
http://www.fujifilmholdings.com/en/about/factsheet/accessmap/

*Meeting secretary*: Sato-san (JEPA)   Emergency contact　+81 90-2642-3852

*Language*: English and Japanese

*Chair*: Markus Gylling (CTO, IDPF)

*Co-Chair*: Makoto Murata (Coordinator of Enhanced Global Language Support Sub-group of the EPUB WG, JEPA)

*Organizer*: Tatsuo Kobayashi (Director, IDPF)

*Meeting secretary*: Sato-san (JEPA)

Light meal for lunch will be sponsored by JEPA.

== Agenda ==

=== Logistics and Introduction (10:00 - 10:15) ===
=== Morning session (10:15 - 12:10) ===

Each presentation slot (except the first one by Murata) will be 45 minutes long including approx 15 minutes for questions/discussions. 

 * Murata: [TokyoWorkshopOpeningTalk] Current status and Future works
 * Aquafadas: Enhancing the reading experience of fixed layouts. Application to comics, children books and table books. (Either [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=AquafadasTalk%20%28with%20animation%29.pptx PPTX], [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=AquafadasTalk%20%28without%20animation%29.ppt PPT], or [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=AquafadasTalk%20%28without%20animation%29.pdf PDF] as well as a [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=IDPF%20Talk.ppt_media.zip zip file] containing additional video)
 * Shueisha: Introduction to the OMF format 

*12:10 - 13:10 LUNCH*
=== Afternoon session 1 (13:10 - 15:30) ===
 * Barnes & Noble: [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=TokyoRenditionMapping6.pdf Rendition Mapping]
 * Sony: [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=sony_epub3renditionselection.pdf EPUB 3 Rendition selection]
 * Fuji-film: [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/downloads/detail?name=EPUB_FUJIFILM_0706.pdf Rendition Mapping for Manga - Fujifilm Proposal]
*15:30 - 15:45 BREAK*
=== IDPF Future Work Options/Planning (15:45 - 17:00) ===

Round table discussion. What are the areas for future work within IDPF/EPUB relating to Advanced/Hybrid Fixed Layouts?

Should we continue/revive the Rendition Mapping and Selection ad-hoc group?

What other possible standardization efforts relating to this area should/could we engage in?