#summary Information and Agenda for the 2011-01 writing party in Cupertino

<wiki:toc max_depth="5" />

= Purpose =
This is a writing party, focusing on finalizing remaining issues and producing spec prose for the [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn-history/r2041/trunk/build/spec/epub30-contentdocs.html ContentDocs] spec, with primary focus on the CSS3 section(s).

= Location =

*De Anza 6* (name of the building)

*10355 N De Anza Blvd, Cupertino, California 95014* ([http://maps.google.com/maps?q=10355+N+De+Anza+Blvd+Cupertino+California+95014+ map])

 * 1/11: Arena meeting room
 * 1/12: Grand Canyon meeting room

The group will take notes over IRC and welcomes remote IRC participation. Remote phone participation is not planned. Please notify Markus over email if you intend to participate over IRC.

= Participants =
_(tentative)_
 * Murata Makoto (FAMILY Given)
 * Fantasai
 * Koji Ishii
 * Peter Sorotokin
 * Takeshi Kanai
 * Matt Garrish
 * Yasuo Kida
 * Brady Duga
 * Mika Nakamura
 * Garth Conboy (likely)
 * Bill McCoy (possibly)
 * Markus Gylling

= Linkage =
 * [http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn-history/trunk/build/spec/epub30-contentdocs.html Latest ContentDocs spec (trunk)]
 * [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/F2F201010Day2Notes Notes & decisions from the plenaries on the second day of the Oct 2010 F2F]
 * [http://www.asahi-net.or.jp/~eb2m-mrt/epub/rec2WG.html http://www.asahi-net.or.jp/~eb2m-mrt/epub/rec2WG.html]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/EGLSProposalComments Proposed modifications to EGLS subgroup recommendation]
 * [CSS3Relations CSS3Relations]
 * [Draft warning note http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/SolutionSNLR3_3]
 * CSS Spec Status [http://dl.dropbox.com/u/8812114/epub-css-status.htm]

= Agenda =
== Day 1, Tuesday 11th of January 9:00 - 17:00 ==

 * introduction, logistics
 * scribing, scribe style
 * finalizing agenda
 * dinner in the evening?

=== CSS Relations ===

==== EGLS ====

 * Identifying specifications in the CSS family that are required for reasonable EGLS support in EPUB3 and reviewing the current status of each of them (when necessary, we review each of the properties)
 * Normative references or non-normative references?
 * Dated references or undated references?
 * What can be implementation-dependent or implementation-defined?  Note: "Implementation-dependent" means implementations can do anything, while "implementation-defined" means that implementations are required to provide documentation for the adopted definitions.
 * What kind of warning is required?
 * Should we attach the prefix *idpf-* to properties?
 * Should we copy syntactical definitions and/or semantics definitions from non-normative references?
 * IPR issues

==== CSS Speech ====
Establish relation as done for EGLS 

== Day 2, Wednesday 12th of January 9:00 - 17:00 ==

=== CSS3 relations cont'd ===
 * action items for completion of profile

=== XHTML5 relations === 
 * approach to non-REC problem (schema nature)
 * rb element

=== Alternate Stylesheets === 
 * how to reference/include Fantasai's document

=== General RS conformance reqs (if time allows) ===
 * Spec needs to be explicit about XML processing expectations on RS (compare [http://www.w3.org/TR/xml-proc-profiles/ XML Processor profiles]): 
  * DTD internal/external subset support?
  * PIs (excluding xml-stylesheet support in SVG)
  * XInclude
  * IDness in the absence of DTD

=== pgt ===

=== ncx issues ===

=== takeshi: questions on scripting ===