**Note** - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [find the meeting time in your geographical location](http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=09&day=22&year=2010&hour=29&min=0&sec=0&p1=0).

**Note** - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.



## Scribe ##
First available in order: _Garth, Marisa, Bill, Dan_

## Regrets ##
Neil Soiffer, Bill McCoy

## Previous minutes ##
Accept [previous minutes](MeetingMinutes100922.md)?

## Previous action item review ##

  * George: continue working towards W3C CSS task force

## F2F updates ##

  * Location info now available in [agenda](http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/wiki/F2F201010Agenda).
  * Preferred hotels?
  * Working Group dinner on Monday October 18th at 6:30 pm PST - **RSVP**
  * Subgroups break-out planning (handling conflicts in terms of needed experts)

## Public email archives ##
http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group

## Subgroup status report ##

_Note to all: target to have as many strawman proposals as possible by onset of SanFran F2F. To achieve this goal, in cases where necessary and possible, subgroup leads may create and publish strawman proposals where subgroup participation has been lacking._

### Annotations ###
Coordinator: Will Manis w help from Daniel Weck

Wiki: [Annotations](Annotations.md)

### EGLS ###
Coordinator: Murata Makoto

Wiki: [EGLS](EGLS.md)

### Metadata ###
Coordinator: Bill Kasdorf

Wiki: [Metadata](Metadata.md)

### Navigation ###
Coordinator: George Kerscher

Wiki: [Navigation](Navigation.md)

### Text Content ###
Coordinator: Markus Gylling

Wiki: [TextContent](TextContent.md)

### Styling and Layout ###
Coordinator: Brady Duga

Wiki: [StylingAndLayout](StylingAndLayout.md)

### Rich Media/Interactivity/Advertisements ###
Coordinator: Peter Sorotokin

Wiki: [RichMediaAndInteractivity](RichMediaAndInteractivity.md)

## OCF updates ##
James Pritchett will produce a proposal on OCF updates with regards to XMLENC, XMLDSIG etc in time for the F2F.

Needed information:
  * which of encryption.xml, signatures.xml and metadata.xml are actually used currently in the ecosystem?
  * based on existing usage, any known deficiencies/missing functionality in OCF 2.01?

(Thread: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/b0a3c59e08dcdc30)

## Styling/Layout ##
Thread: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-21-working-group/browse_thread/thread/57c15b54eff98497

<blockquote>
SNL_R1.5, "Selection of Styles for Various User Settings" offers three use cases, the first two of which are:<br>
<br>
1. Many reading systems allow for font-size and even font family changes. Content may want to adapt itself to account for such changes. For instance, the margin of paragraphs may need to be altered.<br>
<br>
2. Content may want to adapt itself if a Reading System provides a night mode. Typical night mode (found in cell phones, GPS navigators, and other handheld devices) assumes dark background with light text. Some of this can be done using user stylesheet (in CSS terms) and it works for simple files, but in many cases the result is unsatisfactory, for instance if some text was already styled to be light on dark background for some sort of highlighting or special effect, that effect/highlighting is lost. It is better to give the author explicit control over styling in night mode.<br>
<br>
I am not sure if we can address either of these use cases without mandating specific user interface guidelines and implementation details. For instance, there are several ways a reading system might implement font increase:<br>
<br>
a. Increase the named font sizes<br>
b. Increase all font sizes<br>
c. Magnify all content<br>
<br>
Likewise, night mode could be implemented by:<br>
<br>
a. Dimming the display<br>
b. Setting the foreground and background default values<br>
c. Swapping the meaning of black and white<br>
d. For each pixel rendered, draw H, S, 1-V<br>
<br>
Given these different approaches (plus various others - those are just the ones that pop to mind) it seems impossible for a content creator to design a document that would override system behavior based on user settings. Do we see a way to address these use cases without requiring specific interface implementations?<br>
</blockquote>

We will discuss whether there is a meaningful, cross-reading system way to provide these user settings to an author.

## AOB ##