**Note** - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [find the meeting time in your geographical location](http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=01&day=26&year=2011&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0).

**Note** - Catherine Zekri is recording the Epub Revision conference calls and face to face meetings for her research. She writes: "This discussion will be recorded for the purpose of a doctoral research on the standardizing of .epub and eBooks. For confidentiality purposes no names will be disclosed in any publication resulting from this research." To learn more, please visit: http://sites.google.com/site/ebooksandsociety.



## Scribe ##
First available in order: _Garth, Marisa, Dan, Bill_

## Regrets ##
Bill McCoy

## Previous minutes ##
None yet (on Bill)

## Previous action item review ##
  * ACTION: metadata group to take input received here (prev con) and produced revision version of spec draft ASAP
  * ACTION: Keith & linking group to take input received today (prev con) back

## Spec draft status update ##

Timeline remains as follows:
  * final WG draft on January 31st
  * overview and changes docs _may_ be delayed a few days (will be announced)
  * WG review 31st to 13th if February (several updates expected during this period)
  * editors will post pointers to areas of enhanced importance to review to subgroup leads
  * public draft on February 14th

  * January 31st draft will be available from google code site (via [this type of link](http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html))
  * placement of public draft TBD

## Spot for notes/questions from editors ##

  * _Intrinsic fallbacks for SVG?_ (refer to [intrinsic fallback](http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#sec-fallback-processing-flow-intrinsic))

  * confirmation: _page-spread-left and page-spread-right properties s/b on spine itemref_, not manifest item, right?

  * MathML embedded in XHTML has restrictions on media types to use in 'annotation-xml' (restrictions are content MathML and XHTML ).
    * _Any similar restrictions for SVG (as content document or embedded in XHTML )?_
    * _Which elements in SVG are concerned? foreignObject, more?_

## [Issue 64](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=64) ##
[Issue64: recast NCX as XHTML microformat](http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=64)

One week review period has passed. Q and A, WG decision.

Received questions so far:
  * What happens to multimedia support in the XHTML Navigation document?
    * media overlays can be associated with it, regardless of whether it is in spine or not
    * images et al are natively supported

  * Will the fact that navigation labels support any phrasing content create problems for RS that want to render the nav map in e.g. a treeview?
    * there is already a requirement on bare text content (concatenation of text nodes + whitespace normalization = string longer than 0)
    * also suggest to add a requirement that was not in [Issue64](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=64): that _if_ label contains MathML or SVG, then the a element title attribute must provide a fallback.

## [Issue 65](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=65) ##
[Issue65: Request for the addition of unicode-range](http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=65)

One week review period has passed. Q and A, WG decision.

## [Issue 66](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=66) ##

[Issue66: Add CSS 2.0 list-style-type values](http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=66)

_Note that these values were present in EPUB2 (see 3.3 in the OPS spec)._


## Publication Identity ##

_On: BillK_

Proposal from BillK et al:

  * three-segment content-version property dropped entirely - revisit once linking group design stabilizes
  * instead, add a required meta element "dcterms:modified" that describes the time when this epub was last revised, and takes a date+time formatted ISO8601 string (required to be a YYYY-MM-DD-HH-MM-SSZ pattern or some such). This element is only allowed to occur once in the package file.
  * the "composed identifier" consists of uid+dcterms:modified

While not as simple as an integer, this alternative still supports ordinal comparisons, and comes with pros in scenarios with reduced control over the revision process (such as the bouncing Word document described at previous con): a timestamp can be created without having knowledge of predecessors. And - if we want to require metadata items, we want minimize the chances that they become unreliable.

_Note that the intent is that_dcterms:modified_also be the solution to Kida-sans request for version information used to push updates to clients_

[Current draft spec prose on trunk](http://epub-revision.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/build/spec/epub30-publications.html#sec-package-metadata-identifiers)

## Linking ##

_On:Keith, Peter_

Status update.

  * [LinkingTelecon20110125](LinkingTelecon20110125.md)
  * [ImplementationProposalLinkingToRDFa](ImplementationProposalLinkingToRDFa.md)
  * [LinkingImplementationProposalServiceProvider](LinkingImplementationProposalServiceProvider.md)
  * [LinkingImplementationProposals](LinkingImplementationProposals.md)

## Any other business ##