**Note** - this telcon is held at 21:00 UTC - [find the meeting time in your geographical location](http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?month=08&day=3&year=2011&hour=21&min=0&sec=0&p1=0).




## Scribe ##

## Regrets ##

## Reintroduction of dc: `*` elements ##
  * Thread: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/f74dbd3ab4f02d43
  * only reintroduce dc:creator, or additional elements as well?

## RDFa in Package File ##
  * Thread: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/ea06deb3500ac246
  * See solution proposals below

### 148 ###
(if time allows)

http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=148


---


## Solution proposals ##

### Proposal #1 ###
_from BillK and Markus_


#### Overview ####

This proposal uses the approach of "rolling our own" syntactical solution, as opposed to (the charter-imposed) reusal of existing standards where possible. Given the current TAG activities on merging RDFa and Microdata, and given the graph problems identified with our previous minimalistic subset of RDFa (thanks Kawabata-san), it is suggested that rolling ones own is currently the best available option after all.

This proposal intends to achieve these effects:
  * zero dependency on RDFa in Package File metadata (typically achieved by reverting to local semantic definitions)
  * as a result of the above, no implied RDF semantics, no implied RDF graph generation algorithm
  * introduce as minimal syntactical changes as possible, without loosing any of the current top-level functionality

_(For those with an interest in representing the package file metadata as an RDF graph: it should remain possible to describe an algorithm for generating an RDF graph from the metadata. However, the EPUB spec will not define this; such an algorithm could be defined and published as a separate note or some such, if there is enough interest.)_

#### Details ####
The attribute collection (property, about, datatype, prefix) remains conceptually in the Package file, but no longer has any relation to RDFa, and does not carry any inherent RDF semantics. As noted below, we may/should consider some attribute name changes in order to disassociate further; alternatively an informative note that clarifies.

  * **@profile** is dropped in favor of having the specs directly define predefined vocabulary prefixes _dcterms_ and _dc_ as well as the unprefixed vocabulary (which as before is the only one used without a prefix). No change in functionality, but a change in how RS detects which vocabularies are predefined
  * **@prefix** is kept functionally (may change name), but is defined locally. In XHTML and MO, needs to be namespaced to epub:prefix.
  * **@property** is kept functionally (may change name), but is defined locally. The suggestion is, contrary to [Issue 148](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=148), to retain a single token model; we believe we currently lack both real-world usage pattern information and time to define a satisfactory model for a compact/shorthand syntax
  * **@about** is kept functionally (may change name), but is defined locally.
  * **@datatype** is kept functionally (may change name), but is defined locally.
  * The W3C **CURIE** datatype is no longer referenced, but replaced by a local simplified QName-derived construct that represents the subset of CURIEs we currently use (e.g. 'dcterms:isPartOf').

In XHTML and MO,
  * **@epub:type** remains functionally as-is
  * **@profile** is removed, replaced by the directly-in-spec simplification as described for the Package file above.
  * **@prefix** becomes epub:prefix

## Minutes from Telcon ##

TOPIC: RDFa in package file

EMAIL THREAD: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/ea06deb3500ac246

W3C evaluating competing specs, RDFa vs. Microdata

Likely that whatever outcome of W3C process, change impacts EPUB3 metadata scheme

Issues identified in RDFa (triples/graph) generated from EPUB3 subset of RDFa

Some complexity re: DCTERMS not surfaced during initial metadata work in EPUB3

The above taken together point to need for at least re-evaluating, possibly re-formulating metadata scheme

RDFa constructs offer solutions for metadata requirements, however RDFa mechanisms are problematic to limit/subset

PROPOSAL: Roll our own metadata solution, no longer point or refer to RDFa. Keep as much of syntax as possible, but remove reliance on moving/unstable targets.

Do we have general consensus (non-binding) that this proposal is the right approach?

Conceptual agreement on Proposal #1. Final decision set for 10 August 2011.

TOPIC: [Issue 148](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=148): http://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=148

Murata express concern that current limit on @property single CURIE value imposes burden on authors, especially wrt to alternate scripts/phonetics.

Move to close [Issue 148](https://code.google.com/p/epub-revision/issues/detail?id=148), issue closed

TOPIC: DC elements, re-introduction of same

Email Thread: http://groups.google.com/group/epub-working-group/browse_thread/thread/f74dbd3ab4f02d43

Recently surfaced issue re: literal types in values of DCTERMS properties cause problems, impact plan to transition to DCTERMS fully.

Tentative proposal to abandon migration to DCTERMS from DCMES. Re-introduce all DCMES elements into EPUB3 metadata space.

DCMES elements can still be used to anchor and embed data, which can then be referenced from meta/@about=

Question: Can we also allow return of meta/@name/@content?

Use of @name/@content OR @about/@property - not both.

Do not allow return of legacy opf: attributes, i.e. opf:file-as.

Remove @prefer from DCMES to avoid problems

Likely to have subsequent call in one week, same time.